
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



^^^^ ANNStWt 



^ u. 



€tbre«j,of 




£) 






', «■ 



4 4 



i^/i-€ ^ J ^ Ji^J ^^f 



# 



^^*' y r f) ' n I ' D « um 



SCRIPTURE BIOGRAPHY 



THE YOUNG; 



CRITICAL ILLUSTRATIOVS 



PRACTICAL REMARKS 



DAVID: 

INCLUDINO THE LIFE OF SAUL. 



BY RBV^T.J. fiAXJ/AUMT,, 



• " ^* 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN tRACT SOCIETY, 

160 NASSAU-STREET, NEW. YORK. 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in tke year 1843, 
by Thoslas H. Gallaudet. in the Clerk's office of tlie District 
Court of tlie Southern District of New- York. ^ 

Rifrht of publuhlnf transferred tQ the American Tract Society. ^ 






• • ,•• 



.: •/:/••.:•••: 



:• : * • : •-• 



•" • • •* ' 



» 



CONTENTS. 



Chap. 1. — Samuel is sent to anoint David, and ex- 
ecutes his commission. An evil spirit troubles 
Saul, 7 

Chap. 2.— David, being sent for by Saul, visits him, 
plays before him on the harp, (so that the evil 
^irit leaves him,) and returns home, IS 

Chap. 3. — Goliath challenges the Israelites. David 

offers to meet him in single combat, 18 

Chap. 4. — David meets Goliath, and kills him, 25 

Chap. 5. — Friendship between Jonathan and David. 
Saul becomes jealous of David, and lays a plan 
to have him killed, but fails, 33 

Chap. 6. — David becomes the husband of Michal, 

, Saul's daughter. Jonathan pleads with Saul in 
behalf of David, and succeeds, 41 

Chap. 7.— Saul endeavors to kill David, but he escapes. 
David's wife saves him by a stratagem. He flees 
to Samuel at Ramah, • 47 

Chap. 8. — ^Jonathan comforts Davi(f. They renew 
their covenant of friendship. Jonathan's plan to 
ascertain how Saul feels towards David, 54 

Chap. 9. — Saul, enraged at Jonathan, endeavors to 
kill him. Jonathan lets David know the enmity 
of Saul towards him. David goes to Nob, 61 

Chap. 10. — David goes to Gath, and afterwards to the 
cave of AduUam, 68 

Chap. 11. — David provides for the safety of his pa- 

■m ^rents. He goes to tlye forest of Hareth. Saul or- 
•i^, Viers Ahimelech and the other priests to be put to 
|4 death, 74 



3 



ArR -9i^in 23703 L 



4 CONTENTS . J • 

Page. 

Chap. 12 — Doeg slays the priests, except Abiathar, 
who escapes. David succors Keliah. Jonathan 
and David renew their covenant. Saul leaves 
the pursuit of, David, to resist the Philistines, 81 

Chap. 13. — David spares Saul's life, who returns 
home. Samuel dies. Nabal's condition and cha- 
racter, ^ 88 

Chap. 14. — David determines to punish Nabal, but'is 
appeased by his wife Abigail. Nabal dies sud- 
denly, 95 

Chap.. 15. — David marries Abigail, and also Ahi- 
noam. David again spares Saul's life, who bless- 
es David, and returns home. David flees to Gath, % 
and dwells there some time, 103 

Chap. 16 — David and his men dwell at Ziklag. He 
destroys the Geshurites and Amalekites. The 
Philistines prepare to attack the Israelites. Saul 
assembles his forces to meet them, and inquires: 
of the woman at En-dor who has a familiar spirit, 1 11 

Chap. 17.— David returns to Ziklag, and finds it laid 

waste. He pursues the Amalekites, ancLis victo- • 
rious, I2si 

Chap. 18. — Saul and his army are defeated. He kills 
himself. The men of Jabesh-Gilead remove the 
bodies of Saul and his sons from Beth-shan, and 
bury the bones at Jabesh, 130 

Chap. 19. — David's funeral song for Saul and Jona- 
than. He goes to Hebron, 135 

Chap. 20. — David is anointed king over Judah. Ab- 
ner anoints Ish4x)sheth king over Israel. Asahel 
is killed by Abner, 142 

Chap. 21. — Abner offers his services to David, and 

makes a league with him. Joab slays Abner, 149 

Chap. 22 — David orders a general mourning for 
Abner. He causes the murdffters of Ish-bosheth 
to be put Hhdeath, 157 



- CONTENTS. 5 

* Psfe. 

Chap 23. — David is anointed king over all Israel. He 
takes the strong hold of Zlon from the Jebosites. 
He detj^ats the Philistines, 164 

Chap. 24.— David brings the ark to Jerusalem, 172 

Chap. 25. — David offers sacrifices and peace offer- 
ings. He reproves Michal. Nathan informs him 
that not he, but Solomon, should build' the temple, 178 

Chap. 26. — David subdues his enemies, and dedicates 
the spoils to God. He garrisons Edom, and reigns 
over all Israel. He is kind to Mephibosheth. He 
again is victorious over his enemies, I8ft 

Chap. 27. — David's conduct in the case of Bath-sheba 

and Uriah, 194 

Chap. 28. — The prophet Nathan reproves David for 
his sins. The child of Bath-sheba dies. David 
takes Rabbah, 199 

Chap. 29. — Amnon grossly injures Tamar, and is put 
to death by the orders of Absalom, who flees to 
Geshur. After three years, Joab prevails upon 
David to recall him, 205 

Chap. 30. — David is reconciled to Absalom. The re- 
bellion of the latter. David flees from Jerusalem. 
He sends Zadok and Ablathar back with the ark, 314 

Chap. 31 — David sends Hushai back to Jerusalem. 
Ziba obtains his favor. Shimei corses him. Ab- 
salom's gross sin, 224 

Chap. 32. — Hushai's counsel prevails over that of 
Ahilhophel. David goes to Mahanaim. Absa- 
lom's forces are defeated by those of David. 
Absalom is caught in the boughs of an oak, 231 

Chap. 33. — Absalom is slain by Joab. The lamen- 
tation of David over him, 239 

Chap 34. — ^Joab reproves David, who shows himself 
to the people, and they are encouraged. The 
tribes take u^unsel to brings David back to Jeru- 
salem. On his return he is met by SbtBoei, Zi^a. 



6 CONTENTS. 

•Ptfge . 
and Barzillai. The Tebellion of Sheba. Mephi- 
bosheth proves his innocence, 244 

Chap. 35. — Amasa, being sent in pursuit of 6hcba, 
is murdered by Joab. 8heba is killed, and his 
rebellion quelled, 254 

Chap. 36. — A gricTous famine. Seven sons of Saul 

are put to death. David subdues tis enemies, 259 

Chap. 37. — David sins in numbering the people. A- 

pestilence ensues. It is at length stayed, * 265 

Chap. 38. — David makes preparations for the build- 
ing of the temple. His charge to Solomon an4 
the princes. Adonijah's rebellion. David orders 
Solomon to be anointed king, 273 

Chap. 39. — Solomon is anointed king, and pardons 
Adonijah. David assembles certain of the people, 
and addresses them. He gives a charge to Solo- 
mon, 2B0 

Chap. 40.--iDavid contributes of his own property to 
the building of the temple, as do the chief men 
of theirs. His thanksgiving and prayer. Solo- 
mon is anointed king a second time. What 
David did with regard to Joab, Barzillai^s sons, 
andShimei. His death, 287 

Chap. 4i.— Concluding reflections, 294 



DAVID. 



CHAPTER I. 



Samuel is sent to anoint David, and execates his commis- 
sion. An evil spirit troubles Sanl. 

A youthful shepherd becomes the king of a 
.great people. Such was the wonder-working pro- 
vidence of God at that eventful^eriod in the his- 
tory of the Israelites which we now proceed to 
consider. 

The career of Saul was soon to end. His fla- 
grant disobedience of the divine commands had 
caused the forfeiture of his crown. " I have re- 
jected him from reigning ov^ Israel," was the 
declaration of God to the prophet Samuel; ** fill 
thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to 
'Jesse the Bethlehemite : for I have provided me 
a king among his sons." « 

The prophet obeyed the injunction; and to 
avoid the danger that might threaten him from 
the resentment of Saul, he was directed to say, 
when he reached Bethlehem^ that h# had come 
to sacrifice to the Lord. This would ^e no de- 



8 DAVID. 

parture from the tr«th, while the other, aod more 
important object of his mission would, i'or the 
present, be concealed. 

Bethlehem was about six miles south of Jeru- 
salem. It stood on an eminence of steep, rocky 
ascent ; commanding an extensive prospect, and 
surrounded by a pleasant and fertile country In 
the town itself, or its immediate, vicinity, per- 
haps in the delightful valley that stretched for a 
long distance east and west, at its foot, was the 
dwelling of Jesse and his family* He was the 
son of Obed, whose parents were Boaz and 
Ruth, — the same dutiful and pious Ruth who ac- 
companied her widowed mother-in-law Naomi, 
when she returned home from tjie land of Moab. 
I'his excellent woman was now to have a signal 
honor bestowed upon her memory. At no very 
distant period of time from her decease, one of 
her descendants is chosen by the Lord himself to 
be the monarch of his people. 

After informinft the elders of Bethlehem, who 
felt great alarm with regard to the purpose of his 
errand, that it was a peaceable one, Samuel di- 
rected them to sanctify themselves, and unite 
with him in 4be religious rites which he was 
about to perform. He gave the same directions, 
also, to Jesse and his sons i who soon came, ex- 
cept the youngest, to the sacrifice. That young- 
est one, a youth eighteen or twenty years of age, 
remained at kome t(x watch 'the flocks of his fa- 



. DAVID 9 

tKer. It is not improbable, too, that the latter, 
being lAade acquainted by Samuel with the ob- 
ject he luid in* ^^ew, left David behind as alto- 
gether too young, and inexperienced, for the ele- 
vated stati(Ai to which some one of his sons was 
soon to be called. 

After the sacrifice, the prophet proceeded to 
discharge the most momentous part of his duty. 
He had seen the seven sons of Jesse, and, being 
struck with the commanding countenance, tall 
stature, and noble mien of Eliab, the eldest, con- 
cluded that this must be the individual destined 
to sway the sceptre. He was mistaken Other 
and higher qualities were needed in him who 
was to rule the Israelites. The responsibilities of 
the office demanded not only wisdom and energy, 
prudence and valor, but, above all, a disposition 
to govern in the fear of God, and to yield an im- 
plicit obedience to liis commands. When will 
rulers be of such a character 1 When will nations • 
desire and pray to have such rtflersi Who that 
feels for the true prosperity of his country, and 
the welfare of mankind ; who that longs to see 
the kingdom of the Redeemer make progress 
throughout the earth, but will stfive to bring 
about so happy a state of things. 

Eliab was rejected. " Look not on his coun- 
tenance," said the Lord to Samuel, " or on the 
height of his. stature 5 because I have refused 
him : for the Lord seeth not as man seeth ; for 



10 DAVID. 

man looketh on the outward appearance, but the 
Lord looketh on the h^art." He looketh^ my 
young friend, on thy heari; anS what will all thy 
other qualities avail ; beauty and comeliness of 
person, (if thou dost possess them 5) "elegance of 
dress and of manners ; talents of the highest oi^ . 
der, and attainments of the most engaging kind ; 
wealth, reputation, influence, — if4hy heart is not 
right with God ! Alas ! in that ease, these very 
qualities will only aggravate the final ruin of 
thy soul. 

Abinadab the second son was called by Jesse, 
to pass before Samuel. But he, too, was rejected. 
Then came. the third, and the remaining four in 
their order; of each of whom the prophet de- 
clared, by a divine direction, that the Lord had 
not chosen him. He now inquired of Jesse, if 
these were all his children, and being told that 
one yet, the youngest, regained at home, he 
I ordered him to be sent for ; and tt^ show the im- 
portance and ui^ency of his coming, he added, 
that they would not sif down without him to the 
feast of which it was customary to partake on 
such occasions, after the ofifering up of the sa- 
crifice. 

David came, and stood before the prophet ; a 
lovely youth, in the freshness of budding man- 
hood, of a beautiful ruddy countenance, and most 
prepossessing appearance. We may well suppose 
that he deeply wondered at the 'scene around 



lUVlD. 1 1 

him, — At t^e m'tense mterest with which the ven* 
erable man of God ^x^d vpini him his benignant, 
yet anxious ga^, at the amazement and cariosity 
which marked the lixeks of his father and breth 
ren, — and at the solemn suspense with which aU 
seemed to be waiting some momentous issue. 

The mystery was soon explained. The pro* 
phet announced the divine decision, and anointed 
David as the one, chosen of God, who was to be 
at no distant period, the king of Israel. What a 
change is before him. The sceptre of royalty is 
to take the place of the shepherd's crook. He- 
who has been keeping his father's flocks in the 
retired vales of Bethlehem, is to be at the head 
of millions of his countrymen; to direct their 
affairs in peace, and in war to lead forth theit 
embattled hosts against the enemy. That he may 
become qualified for these arduous duties, a di 
vine influence is imparted to him. " The Spirit 
of the Lord came upon David from that day for 
ward ;" inspiring him with those peculiar talentb 
and dispositions which he would need to call into 
exercise. 

Samuel, having accomplished the object of his 
mission, returned to Bamah, and Jesse and bis 
sons to their usual occupations at Bethlehem. 

In the meanwhile, the judgments which Saul 
had provoked by his disobedience, were fast ga- 
thering, to fall upon his devoted head. That pe- 
culiar influence of the Spirit of God which had 



12 DAVIp. 

guided and assisted him in the discharge of his 
public duties, was withdrawn. Left to himself, 
an increased degree of /oily and guilt began to 
mark his downward course ; and, to render his 
fiose the more wretched, ^^ an evil spirit from the 
Lord," as we are told, " troubled him." God 
permitted this to take place, as a kind of punish- 
ment which was justly due to one who disre- 
garding and resisting those divine influences 
which had so mercifully been shed down upon 
him, thus invited, as it were, a demon of wick^. 
•edness to take possession of his breast. To what 
awful judgments do not they expose themselves 
who grieve away the Spirit of God ! 

The consequences of this change were soon 
apparent. Saul showed, at times, by his conver- 
sation and conduct that he was not what he used 
to be. Distracted thoughts, and uncontrollable 
passions, led him to say Aid do things of the 
most strange, revolting, and unworthy kind. 
Those around him did not hesitate to attribute 
this to the true source, nor to tell the king him- 
self what they thought of his case, and to pro- 
pose a remedy. '* Behold now," said they, "an 
evil spirit from God troubleth thee. Let our lord 
now command thy servants, which are before 
thee, to seek out a man who is a cunning player 
on a harp : and it shall come to pass, when the 
evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shal^ 
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well." 



CHAPTER IL 



David, being sent for by Saul, visits him, plays before him 
on the harp, (so that the evil spirit leaves him,) and re- 
turns home. 

Saul yielded to the suggestions that were 
made, and ordered such an individual as had 
keen mentioned, to he provided for his relief. 
Who shall undertake this responsible duty 1 
Who shall dare to stand hefore the royal ma- 
niac, in his paroxysms of distraction, and en- 
deavor to soothe his agitated soull Who will 
have the courage and self-possession to encoun- 
ter his fearful ravings, and at the risk, too, of 
the disgrace and dangers of a failure. Under 
such circumstances,* a man is needed of no 
ordinary character. For he must be one to 
'command both the respect and the confidence 
of Saul. His eye, his countenance, his mien, 
his conversation, his skill in music and in song, 
his wholt soul must be suited to the emergency. 
Where can he be found % 

One of the attendants of Saul had seen David, 
and appreciated his peculiar talents for the ser- 
vice. This young shepherd, though but just 
entering upon adult years, had already acquired 
in the retired sphere in which he moved, a re* 



H DAvy). 

putation for courage atid prudence, and for an ex- 
quisite skill in the nnusic of the times, which se- 
cured the confidence and admiration of those who 
knew him. It is probahle also, (for we know not 
tike exact time which had now passed away since 
he was anointed by Samuel at Bethlehem,) that 
no inconsiderable part of the esteem in which he 
was held, was owing to the extraordinary ripen- 
ing of bis character under the divine influence 
which attended him. The language that the 
attendant of Saul used, seems clearly to implji 
this. ** Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the 
Bethlehemite that is cunning in playing, and a 
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and pm* 
dent in matters, and a comely person, and the 
Lord is with himJ' 

Saul was so favorably impressed with this de- 
scription^ that he immediately dispatched* mes- 
sengers to Jesse, directing David to be seat to 
him. No time was lost in complying with the 
royal command. David went to Gibeah^ the 
place of Saul's residence, about thirteen miles 
to the north of Bethlehem, carrying with htm, 
as was customary, a present from his father to 
the king; a humble one^ indeed, but doubtless 
befitting Jesse's condition^ and the mediocrity 
of his circumstances* It was an ass laden with 
bread) and a bottle of wine, and a kid. JBoth the 
present and he who bore it, were very gracious- 
ly received. Indeed, we are told that Saul loved 



DAVID. 15 

David greatly ; placing him among the nnmber of 
his attendants, and appointing him to the honor- 
ahle office of armor-hearer* He sent a message, 
not long after, to Jesse, requesting him to suffer 
his son to remain, and speaking of him in tenflto 
of the highei^ commendation. There was good 
reason for doing this. For, in addition to the 
other valuahle services of David, he proved 
eminently successful, hy the power of his music, 
in restoring Saul, at least for a season, to his 
usual self-possession and composure oi mind. 
" It came to pass," says the sacred narrative, 
'^ when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, 
that David took a harp, and played with his 
hand : so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and 
the evil spirit departed from him." 

Of the nature oi Saul's malady, and the pecu- 
liar state of his mind, when the evil spirit took 
possession of it, the Scriptures give no exact ac- 
count. Some suppose that as the prophets of 
old used solemn and sacred music to calm their 
minds for the inspirations of the Spirit of God, 
so a similar composure in the case of Saul, pro- 
duced hy the exquisite minstrelsy of David's 
harp, and the devotional, soul-suhduing songs 
which hreathed so sweetly from his lips, caused 
the demOn to depart; as he could dwell only 
where there was a tumultuous and frantic state 
of feeling, and a wild extravagance of thought. 

The great object of his visit being accomplish- 



16 DAVID. 

ed, and other reasons occurring which are not 
disclosed to us, David returned to his home at 
Bethlehem. He continued to follow there the 
quiet occupation of a shepherd; enjoying the 
ptculiar influences of the Spirit of God to pre- 
pare him for the fulfilment of his high destiny ; 
and waiting, with no restless or ambitious so- 
licitude, the guidance of that Providence on 
which he relied to direct his steps. 

In how striking a manner that Providence 
WM thus guiding him. David had been with 
Saul long enough to become acquainted with 
a variety of objects that would afford him useful 
and important matter of reflection in his tem- 
porary seclusion. He had seen something of 
those stirring scenes of life in which he was ere 
long to take a part, and had been taught experi- 
mentally the need of divine wisdom and grace in 
view of the responsibilities that would soon de- 
volve upon him. Especially had he enjoyed an 
opportunity of learning the character of Saul, 
with whom he was afterwards to have so much 
to do, and who would exercise towards him the 
most jealous and implacable resentment. He 
came back from the court of the king, well fit- 
ted to profit by the lessons of heavenly wisdom 
which the Word and Spirit of God would im- 
part, in the peaceful retirement that awaited him. 

How necessary is such retirement, to prepare 
us for the trials and temptations of life« We 



DAVID. 17 

shouAd often seek it,-rin the quiet and beautiful 
solitudes of nature, if they are accessible to us, 
— or, if not, in some other privacy where we can 
commune with our own hearts ; and meditate on 
the dealings of God with us ; and ponder the p%g^ 
of his Oracles of Truth ; and pour out our souls 
before him, in devout supplications for his guid- 
ance and grace. How strong at the present day, 
is the tendency of the bustling and impetuous 
movements of the world, to interrupt and almost 
destroy the performance of these duties. Begin, 
my young friend, now in the morning of life, to 
cherish them as essential to the existence and 
growth of piety in your breast. Pray, watch, 
strive against the encroachments which may be 
made upon them by the business that will en- 
gage and the allurements that will attract you. 
Resolve, in the strength of God, daily to devote 
a portion of your time to private meditation and 
prayer, and the perusal of the Sacred Scriptures. 
It will be your surest safeguard against the world 
and its snares. It will serve to prepare you the 
better to sustain your trials, and discharge your 
duties. It will bring God and the Savior near 
you. If you are truly one of the followers of 
Jesus, it will afford you the privilege of fre- 
quent and sweet communion with him, and quali- 
fy you, with the divine blessing, more faithfully 
to imitate his example, and espouse his cause 
Jesus himself loved such retirement. How often, 

David. 2 



18 DAVID* 

after a day of toil for the good of those around 
him, did the shades of the evening and night 
witness his withdrawing to the stillness of some 
sequestered spot, that he might have his spirit 
i^freshed hy a holy, ineffable intercourse with 
his heavenly Father, and be strengthened, by 
new' supplies of the Spirit of truth and grace, 
for the accomplishment of his divine mission. 

If the Savior so often needed these seasons 
of devotional solitude, how much more do they 
need them who profess to be his disciples,->*er- 
ring, weak, sinful as they are, and exposed con 
tinually to fall before the force of temptation I 



CHAPTER III. 



Goliath challenges the Israelites. David offers to meet him 
in single combat. 

Some time had elapsed after the events took 
place which we have been noticing, when the 
Philistines once more waged war against the 
Israelites. Assembling an immense army, they 
encamped between Shochoh and Azekah, a few 
miles southwest of Jerusalem. Saul was prompt 



DATID. 19 

r 

to meet them, and collected his forces on a 
mountain near the valley of Elah, not far from 
Bethlehem. The Philistines were on the op 
posite mountain ; so that the two armies were 
in full view of each other, expecting soon to lite 
engaged in battle. 

Under these circumstances, what was the sur- 
prise of the Israelites to behold a giant-warrior 
advance from the camp of the enemy, with no 
one to attend him, except the armor*bearer who 
went before him, carrying his shield. It was 
Goliath of Gath; a man of enormous stature, 
being between nine and ten feet in height, and 
of proportionate size and strength. A huge hel- 
met of brass glittered on his head. He wore 
a coat of mail which weighed a hundred and 
fifty-six pounds, with greaves of brass upon his 
legs, and a target of brass Jbetween his shoul- 
ders. The staff of the spear which he carried 
was like a weaver's beam, and the pointed head 
of it weighed not less than eighteen pounds. His 
appearance and intrepid bearing were well adapt- 
ed to strike the Israelites with terror, while their 
dismay was increased when they learned the ob- 
ject of his movement. 

He came to challenge some one of them to 
single combat, and to have the fate of the two 
armies, instead of being decided by a general 
engagement, depend on the issue of this person- 
al encounter With an air of proud defiance. 



20 DAVID. 

and a voice that rang fearfully along the decli- 
vities of the mountain, and throughout the hosts 
of the Israelites, Goliath exclaimed : " Why are 
ye come out to set your hattle in array 1 am not 
I. a Philistine, and ye servants to Saull choose 
you a man for you, and let him come down to 
me. If he he ahle to fight with me, and to kill 
me, then will we he your servants 5 hut if I pre- 
vail against him, and kill him, then shall ye he 
our servants, and serve us. I defy," he taunting- 
ly added, "the armies of Israel this day 5 give^ 
me a man, that we may fight together." 

The Philistines placed great confidence in the 
terrific aspect and martial prowess of their cham- 
pion ; exulting in the triumph which they hoped, 
in one way or another, to secure from the chal- 
lenge which he gave. It would be sure, they 
thought, to strike jerror into the ranks of the 
enemy; so that if accepted, the champion op- 
posed to Goliath would come disheartened to 
the conflict, and he easily slain ; or if declined, 
this would be the result of that general fear 
among the Israelites which would turn the issue 
of a battle decidedly against them. 

The challenge was repeated, morning and 
evening, for the space of forty days ; while fre- 
quent skirmishes were taking place between 
small detachments of the rival armies. It was 
at this point of time that the aged Jesse, him- 
self unable to visit the camp of Saul, felt anx. 



DAVID. 21 

ious to hear from his three eldest sons who had 
joined the forees of their king to fight against 
the Philistines. He concluded to send David on 
this errand, and directed him to go^ with an 
ephah of parched com, and ten loaves of hread, 
for his brethren, and a present of» ten cheeses 
for the commander of the thousand to which 
they belonged.* "Look," said he, "how thy 
brethren fare, and take their pledge ;" — that is, 
some token of their welfare, which had pre- 
viously been agreed upon, and which David was 
to bring back to Jesse. 

Having made the necessary arrangements for 
his departure, and leaving his father's flocks 
under the care of a faithful keeper, David was 
on his way the next morning at an early hour 
He arrived at the camp of the Israelites just as 
their hosts, going forth to meet the enemy, 
rent the air with their loud shoutings for the 
conflict. The Philistines, too, were in battle- 
array and preparing to descend the mountain. 
Leaving what he had brought with him in the 
care of the proper officer, he hastened forward 
into the midst of the army, and, 'finding his 
brethren, communicated his errand, and ex- 
changed friendly salutations with them. As he 

*An epbah was equal to three pecks and three pints. 
The cheeses were not like ours, but slices of coagulated 
milky which had been strained, and after it had grown 
hard, cut into pieces for use. 



22 DAVID. 

was conversing with them, Goliath again came 
forward in advance of the army of the Philis- 
tines, repeating his usual challenge in so loud a 
▼oice that it reached the ears of David. What 
was his astonishment to find those around him, 
and indeed the whole army, as if overwhelmed 
with dismay at the sight of the chaiApion, fiee 
ing from his presence towards their camp. He 
soon perceived from the conversation of the sol- 
diers, how deeply they were afiected. "Have 
ye seen," said one to another, " this man that is 
come up 1 surely to defy Israel is he come up : 
and it shall he that the man who killeth him, the 
king will enrich him with great riches, and will 
give him his daughter, and make his father's 
house free in Israel." 

To he satisfied that he understood them, and 
that what they said was not the mere result of 
the alarm which they felt, David proposed the 
inquiry to several who were near him ; " What 
shall be done to the man that killeth this Philis- 
tine, and takethaway the reproach from Israel V 
adding, with a modest though pious intrepidity 
of soul, " Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, 
that he should defy the armies of the living God 1" 

The universal reply convinced him that Saul 
had indeed ofiered the reward of valor which 
had been mentioned* Strange that the king him- 
self, the leader of his peT>ple, and distinguished 
for his own superior stature and military prow 



DAVID. 23 

ess, should shrink from a personal encounter 
with the champion of the Philistines ! And, if 
possible, still more surprising, that the first indi- 
cation of a spirit that was brave enough to meet 
him, should come from the unpretending inter- 
rogatory of a youthful stranger ! Ihere was one 
near by, who knew this spirit; what appalling 
dangers, in the strength of Jehovah, its possessor 
could dare to meet, and what astonishing ex* 
ploits to achieve. It was Eliab, the eldest bro- 
ther of David. Even in the retired vale of Beth- 
lehem, the occasions had not been wanting to 
show, that this youngest son of the family had a 
measure of courage and strength which bordered 
on the miraculous. This, and the distinction 
which the anointing of Samuel had conferi^d 
upon him above the rest of his brethren, and 
which they themselves witnessed, seem to have 
excited against him the envy at least of Eliab, in 
a very striking degree. It had long been rank- 
ling in his breast, and now burst forth with in- 
creased virulence, heightened, in all probability, 
by the degrading contrast between his own cow- 
ardice and that of the whole army, including even 
the king himself, and the self-possessed intrepi- 
dity which marked the language and the deport- 
ment of David. 

" Eliab's anger was kindled- against David, and 
he said. Why camest thou down hither 1 and 
with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the 



24 DAVID. 

wilderness 1 I know thy pride and the naughti- 
ness of thine heart ; for thou art come down th^t 
thou mightest see the battle." 

The reply of David was firm, yet respectful. 

'* What have I now done 1 Is there not a 
cause V — Wl^t, indeed, had he done to justify 
the reproachful language which Eliab used. He 
had come as a dutiful son, and kind brother, on 
an errand q( affectionate inquiry after the wel- 
fare of his brethren. Finding the state of things 
as it was, and feeling indignant at the provoking 
defiance of Goliath, with a courageous zeal for 
the honor of his country and his God, was there 
not a sufiicient reason for the inquiry he had 
made, and the sentiments he had expressed 1 

He was not to be checked in the noble pur 
pose which he seems already to have formed of 
encountering the champion of the Philistines, by 
any of the sneers or insinuations of Eliab. He 
renewed his inquiry, proposing it to others, and 
still receiving the same answer. His manner of 
doing this began to excite attention ; and, at 
length, some one let Saul know what the words 
and bearing of this young brother of Eliab ap- 
peared to indicate. The king sent for him, and 
to his great astonishment immediately heard this 
language from the lips of David : *^ Let no man's 
heart fail because of him ; thy servant will go and 
fight with this Philistine." 

How unassuming and free from boasting, this 



DAVID. 25 

simple, yet resolute declaration. Such is ever 
the character of true valor; decided, fearless, 
and modest; emphatically so when its reliance 
is on the arm of the Almighty. In bis strength, 
my young friend, go forward to espouse the right y 
and to do your duty with the unpretending intre- 
pidity of the heroic son of Jesse. Be your motto ; 
Let no marCs heart fail him because of the adver 
saries of truth and righteousness. 



CHAPTER IV. 



David meets Gk)liath, and kills him. 

Saul admired the courage of David, but doubt- 
ed altogether his ability to meet Goliath with 
any hope of succeeding in the conflict. He avow- 
ed his fears, and added the reason for them; 
*' thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from 
his youth." 

David was not to be daunted by any conside- 
rations of this kind. He was well aware, indeed, 
of the vastly superior strength of Goliath. But, 
then, he was not going to the encounter relying 
on his own prowess. He trusted in Jehovah to 



?*6 DAVID. 

nerve his arm, and direct his skill. He had al- 
ready experienced the efficacy of this trust on 
occasions of the most imminent danger, and 
when his escape from destruction seemed, if pos- 
sible, more hopeless than, at the present time, it 
did to the apprehensions of the king. He let 
Saul know this, hoping to inspire him with the 
same confidence in God that removed all fear 
from his own breast. " Thy servant," said he, 
" kept his father's sheep, and there came a lion, 
and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock : and 
I went after him, and smote him, and delivered 
it out of his mouth : and when he arose against 
me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, 
and slew him. Thy servant slew both the lion 
and the bear : and this uncircumcised Philistine 
shall be as one of them, seeing he has defied the 
armies of the living God. — The Lord that deli- 
vered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of 
the paw of the bear, he will deliver mo out of 
the hand of this Philistine." 

Saul could resist the pious intrepidity of David 
no longer. He hoped that the result would show 
that the confidence of the youthful hero was not 
presumptuous. He could not but admire and re- 
verence the faith in God which thus triumphed 
over danger the most appalling, while himself 
alas! was a stranger to its power. " Go," he ex- 
claimed, *' and the Lord be with thee." 

So saying, for no time was to be lost, he caused 



DAVID. 27 

his own armor to be put tipon Darid ; the heavy 
helmet of brass upon his head, and the impene- 
trable coat of mail around his body. David girded 
on, also, the sword of Saul, and thus equipped 
prepared to go forward. But he soon found that 
he needed experience in the use of such instru- 
ments of warfare ; and fearing they would prove 
only an incumbrance, divested himself of them. 
He resorted to more simple, yet In his hands 
more efficacious means, with which he had long 
been familiar, and his skill in employing which 
he had often tested. They were means, too, which 
he could use, as he thought, with triumphant sue- 
cess, at a distance from his enemy, and before the 
latter could come so near as to grapple with him in 
a close, personal contest. He did not expect any 
miracle to be wrought in his behalf; but, while 
looking to the Almighty for aid in the preserva- 
tion of his self-possession and resolute intrepidity 
of soul, — the quickening of his eye, and the in- 
vigorating of his arm for the conflict,-^he did 
not remit for a moment, the exercise of his ha- 
bitual dexterity and valor. Such should ever be 
the union of our own efforts with our reliance on 
divine strength, in the performance of duty 5 lest 
we fall into an inefficient superstition on the one 
hand, or, on the other, into an arrogant and per- 
nicious self-dependence. 

David, with his staff in his hand, proceeded to 
a brook near by, and choosing five smooth stones 



28 DAVID. 

out of it, put them in the shepherd's bag which 
he wore. He carried, also, a sling, — a very pow- 
erful and successful weapon of attack in ancient 
times, when used by an experienced marksman. 
Diodorus Siculu^ tells us, that in the assaults, 
made on fortified towns, their slings, in the hands 
of the Baleares, grievously wounded the besieged, 
and in battle broke in pieces the shields, helmets, 
and every species of armor by which the body 
was defended. 

The combatants slowly advanced towards each 
other in view of their respective armies; Goliath 
being preceded, as usual, by his armor-bearer. It 
may well be conceived, that the scene was one 
of overwhelming interest to all who witnessed it. 
Universal stillness reigned. The Israelites no 
longer retreated, but recovering a little from the 
fear which had pervaded their ranks, were to be 
seen turning once more to face the enemy, and 
stopping to gaze with anxious suspense on the 
issue of the encounter. The bold front and ex^ 
ulting looks of the Philistines, clearly indicated 
that they felt sure of victory. Indeed, both they 
and their champion suffered not a doubt respect- 
ing it to lurk within their breasts. As the latter 
saw David approaching, and noticed his youthful 
aspect, and fair, blooming countenance, he as- 
sumed a look of the haughtiest disdain, and ut- 
tered these contemptuous words; "Am I a dog, 
that thou comest to me with staves 1" Then im- 



DAVID. 29 

precathig the heaviest curses upon David, in the 
name of his gods, he proceeded j " Come to me, 
and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the 
air, and to the heasts of the field." 

David fearlessly replied; ** Thou comest to 
me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a 
shield : hut I come to thee in the name of the 
Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israe*, 
whom thou hast defied. This day will the Lord 
deliver thee into mine hand ; and I will smite 
thee, and take thine head from thee ; and I will 
give the carcasses of the host of the Philistines 
this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the 
wild heasts of the earth ; that all the earth may 
know that there is a God in Israel. And all this 
assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not 
with sword and spear : for the battle is the 
Lord's, and he will give you into our hands." 

David had scarcely uttered these words, when 
Goliath rushed impatiently forward to meet him. 
The latter, also, with an undaunted step, hasten- 
ed to the encounter. All eyes were fastened 
upon the two combatants. A breathless silence 
prevails. On which side will be the victory 1 
The God of David interposes. The faith of the 
youthful warrior triumphs, and the contest is 
soon ended. He takes one of the stones from 
his bag, and placing it in his sling, whirls it 
with unerring aim at the head of his antagonist. 
The stroke was as fatal as it was unexpected. 



30 DAVID. 

The stone sank deep into the forehead of Go* 
liath, and he fell prostrate upon his face to the 
earth. To make sure of his victim, David having 
no sword of his own, ran and drew that of the 
Philistine, and standing upon him, severed his 
head from his hody.* 

The crisis had come. The Philistines, horror- 
struck at the sudden death of their champion, 
hetook themselves to flight. The Israelites 
pursued hard after them with exulting shouts, 
destroying vast numbers, and leaving hundreds 
of wounded by the way, as far as Gath, and the 
very gates of Ekron. Having thus driven the 
Philistines into their own territories, the vic- 
tors, on their return, loaded themselves with 
the spoils found in the camp of the enemy, and 
at length reached their own, to rejoice in the 
triumph which the God of Israel, through the 
prowess of his youthful servant, had won for 
them. 

It seems that when David went forth to meet 
Goliath, immediately after his interview with 
Saul, the latter inquired of Abner, the captain of 
the host, whose son the youth was. **As thy 
soul liveth," was the reply, " O king, I cannot 
tell}" upon which Saul directed Abner to ascer- 
tain, and inform him. 

• It is supposed by Ligh^foot, that the ninth Psalm was 
composed by David on the occasion of his victory over 
Goliath. 



DAVID. 31 

At first sight, it may appear strange that David 
should have thus been forgotten by the king, 
considering the peculiar circumstances of their 
former intercourse with each other. But it is 
difficult to say how long a time had elapsed 
since that period, or what changes had taken 
place in the personal .appearance and manners 
of the young shepherd. Besides, SauPs mind 
had been in a very singular state, while under 
the influence of the evil spirit that possessed 
him. How often his paroxysms returned, and 
were relieved by the music of David before the 
latter left him, we have not the means of know- 
ing, nor the effect which they had upon the 
strength of his impressions at the time, or of his 
memory afterwards. In addition to all this, a host 
of anxious cares and forebodings had crowded, 
in tumultuous succession, into the mind of the 
king. When David, therefore, appeared before 
him at the critical juncture of an expected battle 
with the Philistines, (himself and his army terri- 
fied at the portentous challenges of Goliath, 
which no one had as yet dared to accept,) — is 
it surprising that, with so little opportunity for 
clear observation and recollection, he should not 
recognize the son of Jesse who stood before him. 
Abner was careful to execute his commission, 
and, as David returned from the slaughter of 
Goliath, brought him, with the head of the latter 
in his hand, into the presence of the king. 



DAVID. 



Upon Saul's inquiring whose son he was, 
David replied, " I am the son of thy servant 
Jesse, the Bethlehemite." What else passed be- 
tween them on this occasion we are not inform- 
ed. It appears, however, that the conduct and 
conversation of David, together with his pious 
heroism in meeting the Qhampion of the Philis- 
tines, made such an impression on Jonathan, 
SauPs son, while there was something so en- 
gaging in the character of the latter, that " the 
soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, 
and Jonathan loved him as his own soul." On 
the same day Saul let David know that he had 
assigned him a place among his nearest attend- 
ants, and that he must not think of returning 
again to his father's house. 

About this time David carried the head of 
Goliath to Jerusalem, (perhaps to strike terror 
into the garrison of the Jebusites who occupied 
a strong hold there,) and deposited in his tent 
the armor that belonged to the giant, while his 
sword was placed, as a trophy, in the tabernacle. 



DAVID. 33 



CHAPTER V. 



Friendship between Jonathan and David. Saul becomes 
jealous of David, and lays a plan to have him killed, but 
fails. 

Jonathan and David, as we have seen, com- 
menced a friendship of the most intimate kind. 
It is without a paralJel, • for its ardor and dis- 
interestedness, in the records of history. To 
give it the sacred tie of religions obligation, 
they made a covenant with each other; while 
Jonathan' took off the robe and other garments 
which he wore, clothing David with them, and 
putting on him, aiso, his sword, his bow, and his 
girdle. Such presents are still frequent in the 
East, as tokens of respect and* attachment. All 
must have noticed the new and costly articles 
with which David was thus attired ; and it being 
known to whom they had belonged, they afford- 
ed a striking evidence of the peculiar favor in 
which he was held by the king's son. 

Saul, too, bestowed honors of the highest 
kind upon the conqueror of Goliath. He gave 
him an exalted military station, and sent him 
out on important excursions in the public ser- 
vice. His confidence was not misplaced. David 
shewed great wisdom in all that he did, se- 

David. 3 



34 DAVID. 

curing the esteem of the people at large, and of 
those who were more immediately about the 
person of the king. But the time was approach- 
ing when this favorite of his sovereign was to 
find himself the object of an inveterate resent- 
ment. Envy the most malignant, would soon 
take place of the kindly feelings which Saul 
seemed to manifest towards David 5 and the lat- 
ter would have fresh occasion to look to that 
God in whom he trusted for guidance and sup- 
port. Circumstances growing put of the late 
victory of David over Goliath, gave rise to this 
change. 

It seems that after the discomfiture and ter* 
rible slaughter of the Philistines, Saul made a 
triumphal entry into the principal cities of the 
kingdom^ accompanied by a large retinue, among 
the persons composing which David occupied a 
conspicuous place. According to the customs 
of the times, they were met on these occasionsr 
by bands of women, coming out of the cities to 
hail their approach, and to celebrate the success 
of their arms, with appropriate songs and dances, 
and the joyful sounds of various instruments of 
music. As the chorus in which they joined float- 
ed upon the air, these ominous words met the 
ear of the king: **Saul hath slain his thousands, 
and David his ten thousands." And still it was 
repeated: "Saul hath slain his thousands, and 
David his ten thousands." 



DilVID. 3D 

It was giving a pre-eminence to the youthfal, 
and hitherto ohscure stranger, which the pride of 
the monarch could not hrook. Rage took pos- 
session of his breast. He was unable to con* 
ceal it. He gave vent to his agitated feelings ; 
** They have ascribed unto David tea thousands, 
and to me they have ascribed bvt tkonsiuids: 
and what can he have more but the kingdom V 

Already the rejected monarch seems to be 
anticipating who is to supplant him. He had 
been told by the prophet Samuel, on one occa- 
sion of flagrant transgression, that the Lord had 
rent the kingdom from him, and had given it to 
a neighbor of his that was better than he. Does 
he not begin to see who that person isl In the 
great favor which the God of Israel bestows 
upon the youthful son of Jesse; in the wonder- 
ful victory that he has been enabled to achieve 
over Goliath and the Philistines ; in the univer- 
sal esteem that is awarded him ; and in the sin- 
gular discretion that marks his conduct, show- 
ing that he has the wisdom which can come 
only from, the source of all wisdom 5 — does not 
Saul discover in these striking, providential cir- 
cumstances, him that is destined ere long to 
wear the crown 1 Have not his suspicions fast- 
ened upon David, and are they not clearly mani- 
fested in the expression, ** what can he have 
more but the kingdom 1" 

He watches the course of his rival, as he re- 



36 DAVID. 

gards him, with the closest and most jealous 
scrutiny. His mind becomes so disturbed, and 
his breast so agitated with the tumultuous pas- 
sions which reign there, that the evil spirit^ per- 
mitted of God to do it, returns once more to 
take possession of his soul. In the paroxysm of 
frenzy that ensued, we are told, he prophesied in 
the 'midst of his house. He either actually fore- 
told some future events, perhaps the removal of 
the kingdom from him, or assumed the air of the 
prophets when under a divine inspiration, that he 
might the better conceal the murderous design 
which it appears he cherished, at the time, against 
David. The latter, as he had before done, taking 
his harp, endeavored by the power of his music 
to calm the mind of the king. But the rage of 
Saul was not now to be thus subdued. He strove to 
make David its victim ; furiously hurling at him 
the javelin which he held in his hand, and ex- 
claiming that he would smite him even to the 
wall with it. But it failed of its mark. David, 
probably being aware of the danger, dexterously 
avoided it on this and a subsequent occasion, es- 
caping out of the presence of Saul. 

The latter could not but perceive that the one 
whom he attempted to destroy was under the 
peculiar protection of the Almighty, and that he 
enjoyed, also, the divine favor in many other re- 
spects. Himself, he knew, had lost that protec- 
tion and favor. Hence, he not only hated but 



DAVID. 37 

feared David. He dreaded the influence he was 
continually gaining, and the invidious compari- 
sons which would he made hetween their re* 
spective characters. He resolved to remove so 
odious a superior in worth from a place near his 
person, and appointing him captain over a thou* 
sand men, sent him away on some puhlic service. 
Here the youthful commander continued to ex- 
hihit his usual wisdom in the discharge of his 
duties, and to gain still more the affections of all 
with whom he had intercourse, or who knew of 
his measures. " All Israel and Judah," we are 
told, *' loved David, because he went out and 
came in before them." They rejoiced in his ma- 
nagement of the public concerns which were en- 
trusted to his care, and the more the people he- 
came subject to his personal supervision, the 
more they valued him as a man, and respected 
him as an officer. 

The cause of this is readily discovered. The 
Lord was with him, exercising a peculiar influ- 
ence .upon his mind ; guiding him in the adop- 
tion of the best means for the attainment of the 
wisest ends ; sustaining him in the encountering 
and overcoming of difficulties; and inspiring 
him with that unshaken intrepidity which is the 
result of a conscientious performance of duty in 
the fear and the strength of God. 

The Lord was with him. Is He vdth you^ my 
young friend, so that you have a refreshing and 



38 DAVID. 

iavigorating sense of the divine presence! It 
your heart indeed the temple of the Holy Spirit % 
Do you rely on this Guide and Comforter 1 Christ 
promised this support to his disciples. Has your 
faith in the Savior jealized the fulfilment of this 
promise in your own case 1 If so, like David, 
you have nothing to fear. If not, and continuing 
in that state, like the wretched Saul, yoU have 
just reason to dread the terrible displeasure of 
God; and to anticipate your final destruction. 

The apprehensions of Saul were only aggrava- 
ted by the course he had adopted with regard to 
David. Foiled in this way, a deeper plot must 
be laid to accomplish his object. Revenge and 
envy were at the bottom of it. The life of his 
victim could alone satisfy his thirst for blood. 
David must die, not indeed by the hand of the 
king, for he began to dread, probably, the ven- 
geance of his subjects upon so foul a deed, but, 
if possible, by the hands of the Philistines. He 
accosted David with professions of great regard. 
Having deferred the fulfilment of at least one 
part of the reward ofl^ered to the individual who 
should slay Goliath, Saul now would seem desi- 
rous of carrying it into efl^ect. ''Behold," said 
he to David, " my elder daughter Merab, her 
will I give thee to wife : only be thou valiant for 
me, and fight the Lord's battles." 

In these engagements with the enemy, he ho- 
ped the time would not be far distant when some 



DAVID. 39 

oae of them would deliver him from his fears by- 
striking a deadly blow at so distinguished a com- 
batant. David did not decline the honor, though, 
with his characteristic modesty, he expressed his 
diffidence in accepting it. " Who am 1 1" was 
his reply, " and what is my life, or my father's 
family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to 
the kingl" 

But Saul did not fulfil the engagement. From 
some sudden caprice, or stroke of policy, of 
which we have no explanation, at the very time 
agreed upon for consummating the marriage, 
Saul gave his daughter to Adriel the Meholath- 
ite.* May it not have been the case, also, that 
he thus intended to offer such an indignity to 
David in the view of all the people, as to pro- 
voke the latter to some rash, retaliatory speech 
or action that would render it justifiable to bring 
him to public punishment and disgrace. What- 
ever his object was, he was again disappointed. 
The discretion of him whom he sought to ruin 
was not to be baffied, and other devices must be 
attempted before Saul can hope to succeed. 

He was told of the afl^ection which his daugh- 
ter Michal had for the youthful son of Jesse, 
and he aimed to make it subservient to his 
malicious purpose. He resolved to offer her to 
David in marriage on certain conditions, the 

♦ Abel-meholah, the place here probably referred to, 
was beyond the Jordan in the tribe of Manasseh. 



40 DAVID. 

attempt to comply with which he was sure 
would, at length, effect his destruction ; and he 
again proposed to him to become his son-in-law. 
" I will give him her," said the king, " that she 
may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the 
Philistines may be against him." Still, he was 
fearful that having already practised such gross 
deceit in a similar case, it would now be difficult 
once more to beguile his intended victim. He re 
sorted, therefore, to the assistance of those who 
he thought would have an influence in the mat- 
ter. In compliance with his directions, several 
of his attendants had private interviews with 
David, in which they endeavored, by all the arts 
in their power, to induce him to believe that he 
was a great favorite with Saul, and beloved by 
the people ; and that both interest and duty con- 
spired to make his becoming the son-in-law of 
the king an object worthy of his highest ambition. 



DAVID 41 



CHAPT^.R VI. 



David becomes the husband of Michal, SauPs daughter. 
Jonathan pleads with Saul in behalf of David| and suc- 
ceeds. 

David was far from being eager to embrace 
the tempting offer which was made him. He 
preferred rather to decline it, yet in a way that 
should not give offence. Expecting, for such was 
the custom of the times, that a very large dowry, 
or purchase-money as it were, would be required 
of him for his wife, she being of the highest 
rank, he urged this as a reason why he should 
not aspire to the connection. "Seemeth it to 
you," he. said, addressing those whom Saul had 
sent to converse with him, — " seemeth it to you 
a light thing to be a king's son-in-law, seeing 
that I am a poor man and lightly esteemed 1" 

What he said was told the king, who ordered 
a message to be carried to David, that no parti- 
cular dowry would be required of him, but only 
that he should furnish Saul incontestible evidence 
of having slain one hundred of the Philistines, — 
secretly hoping that he would fall by their hands. 
He wished, he said, in this way to be avenged of 
his enemies, and doubtless felt that, among other 



42 DAVID. 

coD'siderations, he was making a strong appeal to 
the well-tried patriotism and courage of David. 

It was hypocrisy of the basest and most ma- 
lignant kind ; murder the most foul, to .be con* 
cealed beneath the guise of the warmest afTec- 
tion and c5onfidence! God could not but haVe 
regarded it with the utmost indignation. For he 
is a God of iruth^ and abhors a lie and him who 
utters one. My young friend, be on your guard 
against deception and falsehood. The world of 
fashion and of business justifies both in what it 
would call necessary and innocent cases. You 
will be under the strongest temptations to yield 
to its influence. Its principles, in this respect, 
are at utter variance with those of the Gospel of 
Christ. Its example is insidious. Abstain from 
all appearance of evil. Lying Ups are abomination 
io the Lord; but they thai deal truly are his delight. 

The message of Saul had its effect. As the 
time had not yet expired for the fulfilment of the 
condition which would make David the king's 
son-in-law, he resolved, if possible, to comply 
with it. Taking the men with him whom he com- 
manded, he made an attack upon the Philistines, 
and slaying two hundred of them, (twice the 
number required,) he immediately sent the most 
cortvincing proof of his achievement to the king. 
The latter did not dare, under these circumstan- 
ces, again to violate his engagement. The youth- 
ful hero became the husband of Michal, who 



DAVID. 43 

cherished for him the fondest afiection; while 
"Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with 
David," and becoming more jealous of him than 
ever, harbored towards him an increasing enmity. 

The late slaughter of the Philistines roused 
them to a new war against the Israelites, of the 
particulars of which we have no account. We 
are only informed that their princes came into 
the field, and probably with a large force under 
their command. David was, doubtless, the great 
object of their resentment, and was sent by Saul 
to meet the enemy. Again, the latter indulged 
the hope that the exposure to which his rival 
would be subject would cause his d^ath. But 
this wicked man was doomed to constant disap- 
pointment in his murderous designs. David's 
wisdom and valor were pre-eminently conspicu- 
ous amid these new and formidable dangers; and 
his victory over the Philistines raised him higher 
than ever in the public estimation. We are told, 
that he " behaved himself more wisely than all 
the servants of Saul ; so that bis name was much 
set by." 

All this but served to aggravate the malignity 
of the king towards him. Sinful passions, if not 
arrested in their course, rush forward with a 
more impetuous and irresistible madness to their 
object. He who once advances the dreadful 
length in guilt of resolving to take the life of an- 
other, will be kept from committing the fou\ 



44 DAVID. 

deed by nothiDg but what appears to him to be 
a stern necessity, or by the subduing grace of God. 
So it was with Saul. God had abandoned him, 
and sin ruled with despotic sway in his breast. 
He had heretofore resorted to stratagem in order 
to take the life of David 5 but now he becomes 
bold in crime. He no longer afiects concealment. 
The royal commands are laid upon Jonathan him- 
self, and upon all the attendants of the king, to 
put the son of Jesse to death. It was a severe 
trial to Jonathan, as well to hear such a cruel 
mandate, and to witness the implacable hatred 
from which it sprung, as to think for a moment 
of the bare possibility of its being carried into 
effect. He could not endure the idea of losing a 
friend whopi he loved as his own soul, and of his 
being taken away, too, in such an unjust and vin- 
dictive manner. He informed David of his peril- 
ous condition, and entreated him to withdraw 
from the danger, and conceal himself in a field 
that was not far distant, in a spot that would 
effectually screen him from observation. Near 
that spot, the ensuing morning, Jonathan said he 
would go with his father, and hold a conversation 
with him in behalf of David, to whom he would 
communicate the result. 

This plan was probably suggested by Jonathan, 
that in case Saul should show no relenting to- 
wards the object of his hatred, or break out into 
a sudden burst of rage, demanding his immediate 



DAVID. 45 

destruction, David might overhear it, and be the 
better able to insure his safety by a speedy flight, 
as soon as the king should withdraw. On the 
other hand, if the interview proved favorable to 
Jonathan's wishes, he would the sooner have an 
opportunity of rejoicing with his friend in this 
happy deliverance from their fears, and of con- 
ferring with him respecting his future course. 

It must have been a night of anxious suspense 
to both, and especially to David. We may well 
believe, that the latter embraced the favorable 
opportunity which his solitude afforded him, of 
pouring out his soul before God in devout sap- 
plications for guidance and protection. It is 
thought that this was the occasion of his com- 
posing the eleventh Psalm, to which the reader 
can refer, and which will be found peculiarly 
adapted to the trying circumstances in which the 
author of it was placed. The commencement of 
it — " In the Lord put 1 my trust " — shows where 
he placed his sole reliance 5 while as it proceeds, 
we find him declaring the great, consoling truth 
that God, by his providence, rules the affairs of 
man, and will cause truth and righteousness to 
triumph at last. 

** For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; 
his countenance doth behold the upright." 

In the meanwhile, Jonathan was ready, at an 
early hour, to propose a walk to his father, and 
probably conducted him to the neighborhood of 



46 DAVIP. 

the spot where David was concealed. His ex- 
postulations in behalf of his friend are earnest 
and strong. His appeal is marked by a simple 
yet touching eloquence. It was aimed to rouse 
the conscience of Saul j to awaken his fears of 
the divine justice ; and to kindle, if possible, in 
his breast, some sentiments of gratitude towards 
one who had achieved so much both for the so- 
vereign and his people, and whose loyalty was 
unimpeachable. " Let not the king," said this 
faithful friend, and dutiful son, — ** Let not the 
king sin against his servant, against David i be- 
cause he hath not sinned against thee, and be- 
cause his works have been to th^e-ward very 
good : For he did put his life in his hand, and 
slew the Philistines, and the Lord wrought a 
great salvation for all Israel : thou sawest it, and 
didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against 
innocent blood, to slay David without a cause 1" 
The plea prevailed. Saul, for the time, seemed 
to come under the influence of better feelings. 
He even promised with an oath, that the life of 
David should be sacred. He soon left the field; 
and Jonathan, remaining behind, had the happi- 
ness of letting his friend know, that for the pre- 
sent the vengeance of Saul was stayed in its 
course. The most tender congratulations passed 
between them, while they recognized with a de- 
vout gratitude the interposition of Providence m 
their behalf. David was soon introduced by Jona- 



luviD. 47 

than into the presence of the king, and entered 
again upon the performance of his usual duties* 
Sad experience, however, had taught him the 
fickleuess of royal favor, and how soon he might 
have again to meet the vindictive rage of Saul. 
He felt more than ever the need of Divine aid, 
and sought it in daily and fervent prayer. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Saul endeavors to kill David, but he escapes. David*s 
wife saves him by a stratagem. He flees to Samuel 
at Ramah. 

Another war hroke out between the Israelites 
and the Philistines, in which, with David as their 
leader, the former were completely successful 
Great numbers of the enemy were slain, and those 
that survived fled in dismay from him, whose 
very name had become to them one of terrific 
import. 

The triumph that thus attended the arms of 
David, and the still stronger hold which it gave 
him on the affections of the people, awakened 
afresh the jealousy of Saul. His malignant pas- 



4j8 DAVID. 

sions were re-kindled. The evil spirit which be- 
fore reigned within him, took possession of his 
breast. Paroxysms of fury returned ; and on one 
occasion of this kind, as he sat in his house, and 
David played before him on the harp, he made 
another attempt on his life by endeavoring to 
transfix him to the wall with a javelin which he 
held in his hand. But he failed. David, anticipat- 
ing the danger, was so quick in his movement as 
to avoid it, retreating from the royal presence, 
while the javelin was fastened into the wall. He 
fled immediately home, hoping to find there a 
place of security. 

But Saul despatched men after him, to watch 
the house and prevent his escape, with positive 
orders to put him to death in the morning.* For 
the light, he thought, would make them more 
sure of their victim. The wife of David was 
aware of their design, and informing him of his 
danger, urged the necessity of immediate flight. 
He yielded to her suggestions, and being let 
down by her through a window, fled to Ramah, 
the residence of Samuel, to seek counsel of that 
venerable prophet of the Lord. 

In the meanwhile, Michal took an image, or 
statue of some kind, which was in the house, and 
laid it on David's bed in the position of one asleep, 

• David is supposed, at this time, to have composed the 
5&*ii Psalm. . 



DAVID. 49 

drawing a covering aver it, with a pillow of goat's 
hair for a bolster ; or, (as some think the original 
denotes,) so arranged it, as to make it appear 
like the^ hair of the individual who was reposing 
there. By this stratagem she hoped to deceive 
the assassins, and produce a delay which might 
possibly aflford some opportunity of interceding 
with Saul in behalf of her husband. Or, if she 
should fail in this latter particular, he would 
have, at least, a little more time to provide for 
his safety. When the morning dawned, there- 
fore, and the men who lay in wait during the 
night, demanded to see David, she told them that 
he was sick, and in bed, probably showing them 
what they supposed was really her husband in 
that condition* 

It would seem that they did not at first at- 
tempt, under these circumstances, to execute 
their errand, but returned to the king, to inform 
him how the matter stood. He felt no relentings, 
either on account of his daughter, or her hus- 
band; but sent his agents immediately back, 
with a command which showed the diabolical 
spirit of vengeance that burned within his breast 
— blood thirsty and inexorable. "Bring him up," 
said he, " to me in the bed that I may slay him." 
David had eluded him too often. He might do it 
again ; and Saul would now have the infernal 
satisfaction of putting him to death with hjs own 
hand. 

David. * 



50 DAVID. 

They who were sent hastened to fulfil the di- 
rections of the king. On entering David's house, 
and making their way to the bed, where they 
expected to find him, how great was their sur- 
prise to detect the stratagem of Michal. Of 
course, they had nothing to do but to inform 
Saul of it, who soon afteir demanded of his 
daughter, why she had thus deceived him, and 
permitted his enemy, as he called David, to es- 
cape. She saw the disappointment and rage 
of Saul, and dreaded lest it might fall with sud- 
den fury upon her own head. Nothing but a 
reason of the strongest kind, she knew, would 
serve to avert the blow, and to furnish this she 
resorted to a downright falsehood. She protest- 
ed that it was to save her own life she had con- 
sented to let her husband leave the house; as he 
had threatened to kill her if she attenipted to 
prevent his doing it. Her attachment to him, 
however, furnished no excuse for such a gross 
departure from the truth. If she had not deem- 
ed it prudent to disclose to Saul what actually 
took place, she might, at least, have remained 
silent, and left it for God to direct the result. 

Samuel felt deeply for the welfare of David, 
whom he saw exposed to such imminent danger. 
Commending him to the care of the Almighty, 
and giving him that advice which he deemed 
best suited to his situation, he was, however 
unwilling to have him return to his own home 



DAVID. 51 

Whik David was with him, he thought that the 
king would hardly dare to commit such an out- 
rage upon a prophet of the Lord, as to do vio- 
lence to one who was under his protection. He 
satisfied David, therefore, that at present he had 
better remain with him 5 and ihey both went to 
Naioth near Ramah, wher^ it is supposed there 
was a school of the prophets of which Samuel 
was the head, and abode there. 

Saul heard of this^ and sent certain of his at- 
tendants to seize David. As they approached 
Naioth, they met the company of the prophets 
engaged in their peculiar religious exercises, 
under d -divine influence, with Samuel as their 
leader. The same influence came upoa them 
also ; and joining with the rest, they were thus 
prevented from carrying into eflTect the object 
of their errand. On Saul's being informed of 
this, he sent others to execute his purpose, and 
still others, a third time ; but they all were 
aflfected in the same manner, uniting with the 
company of the prophets as those who went be- 
fore them did, and leaving David unmolested. 
The king now resolved to go himself in person 
and make sure of the object of his vengeance. As 
he came near to Ramah, he stopped at a great 
well in Sechu, a place which often brought to- 
gether a number of persons to draw water, and 
inquired of them where Samuel and David were 
to be found. Being informed that they were at 



M PAVID. 

Naioth, he ii^mediately proceeded to that place. 
While on his way " the Spirit of God was upon 
him also, and he went on and prophesied," ut- 
tering supplications to the Lord, with sacred 
songs and sentiments, and possibly some pre* 
dictions of the future, ** until he came to Naioth 
in Ramah." There he laid aside his robes and 
external garments, and continued, under a divine 
influence, in the exercises peculiar to the pro- 
phets, all that day and the ensuing night, in the 
presence of Samuel. It may well be conceived 
that this greatly astonished those who witnessed 
it, and led to the exclamation, which was long 
after used as a proverh by the Israelites, — " Is 
Saul also among the prophets V 

These signal interpositions of Providence in- 
terrupted the attempts of Saul to take the life of 
David; while the latter, perceiving the immi- 
nent danger that threatened him. Bed precipi- 
tately from Naioth, and sought an interview with 
his friend Jonathan, who was then at Gibeah. 

Somewhere about this time, probably on the 
occasion of his escaping to Samuel at Ramah, it is 
supposed that David wrote the fifty-ninth Psalm, 
in the conclusion of which he utters these de- 
voutly confiding sentiments, so befitting his con- 
dition : 

" But I will sing of thy power j 

'* Yea I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning: 



DAVID. 53 

" For thou hast been my defence and re(\ige in the daj of 

trouble. 
**Unto thee, O my strength ! will I sing; 
** For God is my defence, and the God of my mercy." 

God is my defence. Happy is he who can 
cherish this trust in the Almighty amid the 
trials and dangers of life. If we are under the 
divine protection, what have we to fear ! Nothing 
then can injure us. The adversary of souls may 
assail us; wicked men may he allowed to in- 
flict temporal evils upon us, possibly even death 
Itself; hut th^ immortal spirit remains secure; 
fellowship with God and the Savior, — with 
saints on earth now, and with the redeemed in 
heaven hereafter, — is unharmed; and a peace 
which passeth understanding reigns within the 
breast. 

God 18 my defence. Be that the deeply felt, and 
constantly cherished sentiment of thy breast^ my 
young friend, and all will be well with thee. 



M DAVID. 

CHAPTER VIII. 



Jonathan comforts David. They renew their covenant of 
friendship. Jonathan's plan to ascertain how Saul feels 
towards David. 

On meeting Jonathan, David informed him of 
the perils through which he had passed, and of 
the implacable hatred that Saul entertained to- 
wards him. " What have I done 1" he exclaim- 
ed ; ** what is mine iniquity 1 and what is my 
sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life 1" 

Jonathan endeavored to allay the fears of his 
friend. " God forbid," said he ; " thou shalt not 
die: behold, my father will do nothing either 
great or small, but that he will show it me : and 
why should my father hide this thing from me 1 
It is not so." 

He probably attributed the conduct of Saul to 
the influence of his sudden paroxysms of anger, 
rather than to any settled malice in his breast. He 
could not believe that he harbored a fixed de- 
sign upon the life of David; especially when ho 
called to mind the promise which his father had 
made him, with the solemnity of an oath, that it 
should be secure. 

But David knew that Jonathan was mistaken in 
this respect, and that it was necessary he should 



PAvio. 55 

be undeceived. For nothing but a deep con- 
viction of the critical emergency of the case, he 
was satisfied, would lead Jonathan to pursue 
those measures which were essential to his safe- 
ty. With great earnestness, therefore, and an 
accompanying appeal to heaven for the truth of 
his declarations, he thus- addressed him ; ** Thy 
father certainly knoweth that I have found grace 
in thine eyes ; and he sailh, Let not Jonathan 
jcnow this, lest he be grieved : but truly as the 
Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but 
a step between me and death." 

Jonathan believed his friend. He perceived 
his perilous condition, and was ready to assist 
him to the extent of his power. " Whatever 
thy soul desireth," said he, "I will even do it 
for thee." 

David had formed his plan of procedure. It 
was a wise one. He was looking forward to the 
course which it would probably be necessary for 
him to adopt in resisting the settled purpose of 
Saul to take his life, and wished to let Jonathan 
see that it would be the result of nothing but a 
stern necessity growing out of this purpose. He 
was sure that no change would take place in 
Saul's feelings towards him, and was desirous 
of affording Jonathan additional proof of this. 

The morrow would be the new moon ; a day 
when the usual sacrifice would be offered up, and 
the feast following it be attended by the king, his 



56 DAVID. 

family, and those who were more immediately 
about his person. On such occasions David, as 
one of his principal officers, had been in the 
habit of occupying a conspicuous place. But 
now he proposed to be absent, and on the even- 
ing of the third day to conceal himself in a 
neighboring field, there to wait, and learn from 
Jonathan the result of the experiment. In the 
meanwhile, he would visit Bethlehem, to cele- 
brate with his father and family the yearly sacri- 
fice which it was their custom to offer up before 
the Lord. If Saul missed David, and inquired 
for liim on either of the days of the feast, Jona- 
than was to assign his performance of the re- 
ligious duty at Bethlehem as the reason of his 
absence. Should the king say, " it is well," this 
was to be an indication that the danger which 
threatened David had, at least for the present, 
passed away. On the contrary, should the rage 
of the king be excited, it would afford a convinc- 
ing proof that his murderous design was still 
pressing forward to its execution. To this he 
added, " Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with 
thy servant ; for thou hast brought thy servant 
into a covenant of the Lord with thee : notwith- 
standing, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thy- 
self 5 for why shoaldst thou bring me to thy 
father V 

Jonathan, in reply, begged David to banish aL 
these apprehensions, and not to think, for a mo- 



DAVID. 57 

ment, that his friend could suspect him of any 
crime deserving of such a fate, or that he had 
the least design of betraying him to Saul ; add- 
ing, " for if I knew certainly that evil were de- 
termined by my father to come upon thee, then 
would I not tell thee 1" 

David was satisfied. He had put Jonathan to 
a severe test, and found that his friendship re- 
mained unshaken. He perceived that he was 
ready to adopt the proposed plan. But in what 
way should the result be communicated to David. 
" Who shall tell mel" said he, " or what if thy 
father answer thee roughly 1" 

'* Come, and^let us go out into the field," was 
the reply of Jonathan, who had already con- 
ceived his plan of operation, and wished to be 
more sure of not being overheard or interrupted, 
while he disclosed it to his friend. They went; 
and Jonathan, after appealing to the Lord God of 
Israel as a witness of the sincerity of his profes- 
sions, assured David that he would let him know 
the state of Saul's feelings towards him. ** Be- 
hold, if these be good toward David, and I then 
send not unto thee, and show it thee, the Lord 
do so and much more to Jonathan : but if it 
please my father to do thee evil, then I will 
show it thee, and send thee away, that thou 
mayest go in peace : and the Lord be with thee, 
as he hath been with my father." 

It is manifest from this, that Jonathan was 



58 PAVID. 

aware of David^s being chosen of the Loi^d to be 
king of Israel at no very distant period. What- 
ever of success had attended his father's reign 
he attributes to the true source, and prays that 
David, when he comes to the throne, may be fa- 
vored with the same divine guidance and pro- 
tection. In the exercise of this power^ Jonathan 
is anxious to secure for himself and his descend- 
ants the unwavering frieadship of the new mo- 
narch, and proposes entering into a covenant 
with David to that effect. " Thou shalt not only," 
said he, "while yet 1 live, show me the kindness 
of the Lord, that I die not: But also thou shalt 
not cut off thy kindness from .my house for 
ever. No, not when the Lord hath cut off the 
enemies of David every one from the face of 
the earth." 

The covenant was made between the two 
friends ; Jonathan adding to it an imprecation 
of the judgments of the Almighty upon himself 
and his descendants, if he, or any of them^ 
should violate it by b^ing found among the ene- 
mies of David. He required the latter, also, to 
repeat the solemn engagement under the sanc- 
tion of an oath 5 "because," we are told, "he 
loved him : for he loved him as he loved his 
own soul." He felt for David so strong an at- 
tachment, and regarded their mutual friendship 
as 60 sacred, that he could not endure the 
thought of its suffering any interruption or 



DAV19. 59 

abatement, and would have it cemented afresh 
by the most solemn, religious obligations. 

Jonathan was now ready to, unfold his plan of 
procedure. He told David that his absence would 
undoubtedly be noticed, and requested him, on 
the third day to return quickly from Bethlehem, 
and hide himself in his former place of conceal- 
ment, near a stone which he called Ezel^ a word 
signifying thai showeth the way, " And," he conti- 
nued, ^^ I will shoot three arrows on the side 
thereof, as though I shot at a mark. And, be- 
hold, I will send a lad, saying, Go find out the 
arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad. Behold, 
the arrows are on this side of thee, take them ; 
then come thou : for there is peace to thee, and 
no hurt ; as the Lord liveth. But if I say thus 
unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are be- 
yond thee ; go thy way : for the Lord hath sent 
thee away." To this he added his earnest sup- 
plication, that the Lord would be the judge, to 
see whether the covenant entered into between 
David and himself would at any time be violated, 
either by themselves or their descendants, and, 
in such a case, render justice to the offenders. 

Every thing was now ready for the two friends 
to carry their plan into execution. Jonathan re- 
turned to his residence, while David concealed 
himself in the field till a favorable opportunity 
should offer for his proceeding unobserved to 
Bethlehem. He cast himself once more upon 



60 DAVID. 

the protection of the Almighty 5 while so far as 
human agency was concerned, he reposed an 
entire confidence in the fidelity of Jonathan. 

How invaluable is a faithful friend, especially 
when the afTection which thus hinds one to us is 
attended with religious principle. Human friend- 
ships, alas! are too often, like all the other 
affairs of this world, uncertain and transitory. 
When they are formed between the sincere fol- 
lowers of Jesus, and from the desire of encou- 
raging each other's hearts, and strengthening 
each other's hands, in the promotion of hisp 
cause, they resemble the communion of the re 
deemed in heaven. They are among the choic- 
est blessings that God sheds down upon his chil- 
dren. They serve to inspire the noblest senti- 
ments. They rouse to action the loftiest pur- 
poses of the soul. They call into exercise the 
purest affections. They keep from falling into 
decay the finest sensibilities. They cherish hope, 
and strengthen every wise and good "resolution. 

Be worthy of such friendships, my young 
friend ; and when formed, be true to their sacrea 
observance even unto death. 



DAVID. SI 



CHAPTER IX. 



Saal, enraged at Jonathan, endeavors to kill him. Jonathan 
lets David know the enmity of Saul towards him. David 
goes to Nob. 

The next day came, the day of the new moon. 
The sacrifice had been offered up, and the royal 
household were assembling to partake of the 
customary feast. Jonathan approached it with 
tn anxious and foreboding spirit, and occupying 
his accustomed seat waited the entrance of the 
king. At length he came* His son rose in token 
df respect, but soon resumed his place, Saul 
naving taken his; while Abner, the general of 
his armies, sat at his side. One seat was vacant, 
[t was that of David. Every moment did his 
friend expect that the king would take notice of 
it, and give vent to his feelings. But nothing to 
this effect escaped from his lips the whole day. 
Saul, indeed, observed the absence of David, and 
thinking that some ceremonial uncleanness had 
kept him from the feast, expected his attendance 
on the morrow. 

The morrow came. The feast was renewed, 
yet David was not there. Saul expressed his 
surprise at it. " Wherefore," said he, ** cometh 



62 DAvm. 

not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday 
nor to-day V 

Jonathan replied, that David had earnestly 
asked leave of him to go to Bethlehem ; adding, 
**he said, Let me go, I pray thee 5 for our family 
hath a sacrifice in the city ; and my brother, he 
hath commanded me to be there : and now if I 
have found favor in thine eyes, let me get away, 
I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he 
Cometh not unto the king's table." 

The anger of Saul was kindled. It burst forth 
in the most opprobrious abuse of Jonathan. He 
disowned him ; stigmatising him as the son of a 
"perverse, rebellious woman," from whom, as it 
were, he had inherited his treacherous disloyalty, 
and reproaching hitn with having chosen the son 
of Jesse as his friend, to his own disgrace, and 
that of his unworthy mother. " As long as the 
son of Jesse liveth upon the ground," he con- 
tinued, " thou shalt not be established, nor thy 
kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him 
unto me, for he shall surely die." 

" Wherefore shall he be slain 1" inquired Jona- 
than ; " What hath he done 1" 

This but roused the rage of Saul the more. 
Conscious of the innocence of David, and of his 
own unjustifiabhi resentment towards him, he 
could not brook the implied reproof contained in 
the question, and- sought to find in the latter, if 
he could not in David himself, the victim of his 



DAvin. 63 

vengeance. He hurled at his son the javelin 
which he held, with an intent to take his life. 
But Jonathan avoided the stroke, and rising from 
the feast in fierce anger, left the presence of his 
father. Nor did he partake of any food during 
that day ', he was so overwhelmed with grief at 
the conduct of Saul, and at the puhlic and un- 
merited disgrace which had been inflicted both 
upon his friend and himself. No doubt now re- 
mained in his mind with regard to the inflexibility 
of his father^s purpose to put David to death. 
The sooner the latter could be apprised of this 
the better. Yet it must be done with caution. 
David would certainly be in his place of conceal- 
ment on the third day of fhe feast. Early, there- 
fore, in the morning of that day, Jonathan went 
out into the field, accompanied by a young lad, as 
had been ag;reed upon. Approaching the well- 
known stone, he ordered the lad to run forward 
in that direction, and gather up the arrows which 
he should shoot, to bring them back to him. In 
the meanwhile he shot an arrow quite beyond 
him, and as he was reaching the place where it 
fell, Jonathan cried out, ** Is not the arrow beyond 
thee 1" adding, " make speed, haste, stay not." 
The lad, ignorant of the momentous errand on 
which he had been sent, gathered up the arrows 
and brought them to his master, who immediately 
sent him back with them, and the bow and quiver, 
into the city. 



Gl DAVID. 

Jonathan lingered behind. He had come pre- 
pared to withdraw immediately if necessary 5 but 
seeing nothing which threatened exposure, he 
could not forego the satisfaction of a short, part- 
ing interview with David. The latter came forth 
from his hiding-place, already aware of his des- 
tiny. He must flee with all possible despatch from 
the inexorable malice of the king. He must be an 
exile from the court, from his friends, from his 
home, from the altars. of his God, and the ordi- 
nances of religious worship. He must leave Jona- 
than, on whom, under Providence, he most relied 
for counsel and protection, never perhaps to meet 
him again in this world. It was a moment of 
overwhelming interest. The circumstances of the 
occasion, too, demanded haste. A look, a word, 
a short and hurried farewell, and these two friends 
must separate. 

David approached Jonathan, giving vent to the 
noble and ingenuous, as well as grateful emotions 
of his breast. He wished to let his friend see 
how much he respected him, both in his charac- 
ter and rank, and that he should not forget to do 
this in his future course, which Providence, (so 
he was taught to believe,) would yet mark with 
prosperity and elevation. He bowed himself to 
the ground three times, and rising embraced 
Jonathan. They kissed each other. They wept 
a profusion of tears; David's grief exceeding 
that of his friend. They prepared to separate 



DAVID. 65 

The farewell of David is not recorded. Perhaps 
his heart was too full for utterance. His looks, 
his sighs, his tears may have been the only lan- 
guage of his soul. Jonathan's parting words 
were few, but full of meaning, showing the piety 
of his heart, and the sacred fidelity of his friend- 
ship. ** Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn 
both of us in the name of the Lord, saying. The 
Lord be between me and thee, and between my 
seed and thy seed for ever." Jonathan then re- 
turned to G'tcYih 5 while David sought to escape 
the danget that threatened him by fleeing to Nob, 
a city in the tribe of Benjamin, some eight or 
ten miles distant. It seems that the tabernacle, 
for some reason, had been removed there from 
Shiloh; while the ark yet remained at Kirjath- 
, jearim. Ahimelech, the high priest, was at Nob, 
and from him David hoped to obtain that pro- 
tection which he had failed to receive from the 
prophet Samuel, and Jonathan the son of the king. 
The high priesf, when he saw the unhappy 
exile, was apprehensive that some disgrace, or 
evil, had befallen him, as he came without his 
usual retinue ; and immediately inquired the rea- 
son of this. The temptation to conceal the real 
cause, and even to depart from the truth, (so im- 
minent did David consider his danger to be,) was 
too strong to be resisted. Hoping the better to 
elude the search of Saul, and fearing there might 
be those at Nob who would betray him, he r©» 

David. 5 



66 DAVIDi 

plied to Ahimelech, that the king had despatched 
him upon a business which he had been ordered 
to execute with great secrecy, and that his at- 
tendants were stationed at convenient places to 
wait his further orders. A few only were with 
him, and for these and himself he asked of the 
priest a small supply of food ; five loaves, if there 
were so many, of the bread which was in his 
possession. 

Ahimelech replied that be had none but hal- 
lowed bread 5 (the show-bread,. which, used to re- 
main a week on the golden table in the sanctuary, 
and was taken thence for the use of the priests 
and their families.) He was willing, however, to 
distribute this to David and his attendants, pro- 
vided they were all free from any ceremonial 
uncleanness. David assured him that this was 
the ca«e, and added that he ought not to scruple 
to comply with his request, as the bread was al^ 
ready in a manner common, since the peculiar 
religious use of it was at an end, other bread 
having been that day sanctified, and placed' in its 
stead. 

The high priest consented; and what took 
place at this time, it will be recollected, was re- 
ferred to by our Savior when the Pharisees found 
fault with his- disciples for plucking and eating 
the ears of corn on the Sabbath-day, to satisfy 
the demands of hunger. " Have ye not read," 
said he, ^* what David did when he was an hun- 



DAVID. 67 

gered, and they that were with him : how he en- 
tered into the house of God, and did eat the show 
bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither 
for them which were with him, hut only for the 
priests. Or, have ye not read in the law, how 
that, dh the Sabbath-days the priests in the tem- 
ple profane the Sabbath, and are blameless 1 But 
I say unto you, that in this place is one greater 
than the temple. But if ye had known what this 
meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye 
would not have condemned the guiltless. For 
the sou of man is lord even of the Sabbath-day." 
Christians serve a kind Master ; one who, on 
the Sabbath, as well as on other days, will not 
require of them a stricter service in all external, 
religious observances than is compatible with the 
demands of necessity and mercy. But let them 
be careful not to abuse this, indulgence. Let them 
conscientiously and prayerfully inquire when it 
may be fairly applied to their case, and especially 
on that sacred day, devoted to the worship of 
God, when their example has such a mighty in 
fluence, for good or evil, on the world around 
them. 



68 DAVID. 



CHAPTER X. 



David goes to Gath, and afterwards to t^e cave of Adullara. 

The compliance of Ahimelech with David's 
request would seem to have prepared the way 
for his placing himself more completely under 
the protection of the high priest, and remaining a 
longer time at Nob ; but a circumstance occurred 
that urged him to seek still another place of re- 
fuge. He noticed at the tabernacle an Edomite, 
by the name of Doeg, the chief of Saul's herds- 
men. Being, probably, a professed proselyte to 
the faith of the Israelites, having hoped in that 
way to ingratiate himself into the good opinion 
of the king, he had come to the sanctuary of the 
Lord to discharge a vow which he had made, or 
to take a part in some religious observances. His 
conduct afterwards, as we shall see, showed that 
he was strongly devoted to Saul's interests, and 
that David had good reason to fear him. 

The occasion demanded despatch, for David 
knew not how expeditiously Doeg might take 
means to betray him to the king. Resolving to 
leave Nob that very day, he deemed it best to 
provide himself with some weapons of defence 
in case of emergency, and asked the high priest 



DAVID. 69 

if he could furnish him with them ; adding that 
he had brought none, " because the king's business 
required haste." 

" The sword of Goliath the Philistine," replied 
Ahimelech, *' whom thou slewest in the valley of 
Elah, behold it is here wrapped in a cloth behind 
the ephod : if thou wilt take that, take it : for 
there is no other save that here." 

"There is none like that," said David, " give 
it me." He had wielded it once, in the strength 
of the Lord, when triumphing over his enemy, 
and, in the same strength, felt equal to trying 
again its massy power, should the occasion re- 
quire it. 

What counsel David sought of the high priest, 
or, through him, of the Lord, we are not told. 
Doeg, as we shall find, informed Saul afterwards 
that Ahimelech had inquired of the Lord in be- 
half of David. But this is all we know of the 
matter. 

We next find David on his way to Gath, a city 
of the Philistines, of which Achish was the king. 
It is most probable that he went there, because 
he deemed it the safest course, at present, not to 
remain within reach of Saul's emissaries in any 
part of his dominions Yet it seems surprising, 
that he sought protection in the city of a for- 
miidable foe of the Israelites, an^i the late resi- 
dence, too, of the boasted champion of the Phi- 
listines whom he had slain. David may have re* 



70 DAVID 

lied On the generous boldness of such an act, 
and hoped that it would meet with equal mag- 
nanimity on the part of a brave enemy. But what- 
ever may have been the favorable feelings of 
Achish towards him, the attendants of the king 
soon endeavored to convince him that it would 
not be safe to entertain so dangerous a guest, as 
they regarded David. They reminded Achish 
that this was the individual who was to be king 
of Israel. They told him he was the one whose 
extraordinary prowess in the killing of Goliath, 
and the discomfiture of their hosts, had been 
celebrated in the triumphal dances and songs of 
his countrywomen, and that there could be no 
hope, (for possibly the king might have indulged 
it,) of withdrawing him from the interests of the 
Israelites, or of securing his permanent friendship 
See Psalm 56. 

David was aware of these things, and feared 
the result. He was ** sore afraid of Achish the 
king of Gath," and, to escape out of his power, 
assumed the appearance of one bereft of reason. 
"He changed his behavior before them, and 
feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrab- 
bled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle 
fall down upon his beard." 

The stratagem succeeded. The king regarded 
the suspicions and fears of his attendants as un- 
founded, and even reproved them for the course 
which they had taken. " Lo," said he, " ye see 



DAVIP. 71 

the man is mad : wherefore then have ye hrought 
him to me 1 Have I need of madmen, that ye 
have hrought this fellow to play the madman in 
my presence; shall this fellow come into my 
house f ' See Psalm 34. 

David lost no time in availing himself of this 
opportunity of escape, and leaving Gath, fled into 
the valley of Judah to a strong hold near the 
city of Adullam, a few miles southwest of Jeru- 
salem. It was a deep cave, where he hoped, for 
a season at least, and till some other expedient 
could he found, to he secure from the malice of 
Saul. His condition and feelings are strikingly 
delineated in the one hundred and forty-second 
Psalm, which it is thought he composed at this 
time, and to which the attention of the reader is 
invited. 

Bethlehem was in the neighborhood of Adul- 
1am, and it was not long before Jesse and his 
family heard of the situation of David. Perceiv- 
ing that there was no hope of Saul's ever becom- 
ing reconciled to him, and that a portentous 
crisis had arrived in his affairs, they resolved to 
unite their destiny with his, and resorted imme- 
diately to the place of his concealment. It is 
most probable that the father at least had a firm . 
belief that his son would be king of Israel, and 
at no very distant period. He felt, too, how soon 
the vengeance of Saul might strive to wreak 
itself upon the whole family, and that every rea? 



72 DAVID. 

son both of future advantage, and of present se- 
curity, demanded their union with David. It may 
well be conceived, that it was to the latter a 
source of great encouragement thus to receive 
the countenance of his venerable parents, and 
his brethren. 

Others, also, joined him in considerable num- 
bers 5 those who were in distress, or in debt, or 
discontented with their condition,:~so that he 
was soon at the head of a band of about four 
hundred men, with their wives and children. 
They may have hoped to lead a life of plunder 
and violence, or to <:ommence a course of des- 
perate conspiracy against the king, thinking that 
David would rejoice, in this way, to gratify his 
revenge towards his persecutor. But if they were 
influenced by any such motives, they found them- 
selves greatly mistaken. David soon let them 
see that his discipline was intended to produce 
strict order and correct conduct on their, part, 
of which we shall find abundant proof as we ad- 
vance in the history. He resolved to employ 
them for good and justifiable purposes; and 
doubtless his own example, as well as his autho- 
rity, had a poTjterful effect in leading them to 
. reform their lives, and to act as duty to their 
country and their God should require. 

It seems, that by this time the news of David's 
situation, and of the posture of afiairs between 
him and Saul, was spreading far and wide through- 



DAVID. 73 

out the nation, and exciting a deeper and deeper 
interest. We must infer this from the fact, as it 
is generally understood, of certain of the princi- 
pal men among the Gadites, coming from he* 
yond the Jordan to join the forces of David. 
They were eleven in numher ; " men of might, 
and men of war, fit for the battle, that could han- 
dle shield and buckler, whose faces were like 
the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes 
upon the mountains." They were either cap- 
tains of the hosts of Saul at the time, or of those 
of David afterwards, some over hundreds, and 
some over thousands. Abundant proof both of 
their courage, and of their devotion to the cause 
of David, was given by their crossing the Jordan 
at the most dangerous period, when it had over- 
flown its banks, and by putting to flight all in 
the valleys, towards the east and the west, who 
attempted to oppose their progress. 

The tribes, too, of Benjamifi and Judah fur- 
nished no inconsiderable accession to the band 
at the cave of Adullam. David, indeed, as he 
saw the men approaching, had at first some fears 
lest they might prove to be the emissaries of 
Saul, and addressed them in the following lan- 
guage 5 " If ye 'be come peaceably unto me to 
help me, my heart shall be knit unto you : but if 
ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing 
there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our 
fathers look thereon, and rebuke it." Their pious 



14> DAVID. 

and patriotic reply, soon put his mind at rest, 
and inspired him with fresh confidence in the 
over-ruling providence of God. " The Spirit 
came upon Amasai, who was chief of the cap- 
tains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on 
thy side, thou son of Jesse ; peace, peace he unto 
thee, and peace be to thy helpers I for thy God 
helpeth thee." 

David welcomed them to his hold, and imme- 
diately made them captains of his band. 



tAMAAA^MMAAMA^M 



CHAPTER XI. 



David provides for the safety of his parents. He goes to 
the forest of Hareth. Saul orders Ahimelech and the 
other priests to be put to death. 

An occurrence took place while David was in 
the cave of Adullam, which, though not of much 
importance in itself, showed the devoted attach- 
ment of his followers, and the danger to which 
they were ready to expose themselves on his 
account. He had expressed a strong desire to 
drink of the water of Bethlehem, his native city, 
which was not far distant, and occupied at the 



DAVID. 75 

time by a body of thp Philistine forces. This 
came to the ears of three of the bravest of his 
chieftains, who no sooner heard of it than they 
resolved to gratify the wishes of their leader. 
Making their way through the hosts of the ene- 
my, whether at the expense of any of the lives 
of the latter we are not told, they reached the 
well near the gate of the city, and drawing a 
supply of water, brought it back in safety to Da- 
vid. He was so much affected by the intrepidity 
of the exploit, and the risk they had incurred, 
that he did not drink of the water, but poured it 
out, as a religious offering ]»efore the Lord. ** Be 
it far from me, Lord !" he exclaimed, " that I 
should do this : is not this the blood of the men 
that went in jeopardy of their lives 1" 

The situation of David, he perceived, exposed 
his aged parents to many hardships and dangers, 
and, as might prove to be the case, to the risk 
of being seized by the forces of Saul, should he 
send them forth against him in considerable num- 
bers. He felt it to be his duty to provide for their 
safety, and went himself to Mizpeh, the residence 
of the king of Moab, a city of Gad, in the moun- 
tains of Gilead, for this purpose. Could he place 
them there, under the protection of that monarch, 
his mind would be greatly relieved, and they 
spared much anxiety and alarm. The king of 
Moab, being at variance with 5aul^ he thought, 
would be favorable to his wishes, and in addition 



7f> DAVID. 

to this, he who solicited the hoon was descended 
from a Moahi^ess. " Let my father and my mo- 
ther, I pray thee," said he, " come forth, and be 
wjth you, till I know what God will do for me." 

His request was granted, and the parents of 
David remained with the king of Moab as long 
as the former continued in his strong hold at 
Adullam. ' 

We see in this a striking exhibition of dutiful, 
filial affection. Afl^airs of great moment pressed 
upon the attention of David. He needed to be 
continually watchful and active, in order to pur- 
sue the course of wisdom; to regulate his in- 
creasing forces ; to guard against the attacks of 
an enemy ; and to provide for his own safety on 
' which such various and important interests de- 
pended. But these things must not stand in the 
way of the duty which he owed to his beloved 
parents. He left his affairs, for a* season, under 
the care of that Providence in whom he trusted, 
while himself took a long and perilous journey 
to fulfil these sacred obligations. 

A greater than David, and with infinitely 
greater interests weighing upon his soul, has set 
before us a still more afifectlng example of filial 
piety. While Christ was agonizing on the cross, 
and about to consummate by his death the work 
for which he came into our world, that heart 
which was bleeding as a propitiatory sacrifice 
for the sins of millions, yearned, also, with the 



DAVID. 77 

aflection of a son towards his mother. He com- 
mended her to the beloved disciple. " Woman," 
said he, " behold thy son." " BehoM thy mo- 
ther," was the short and touching injunction ad- 
dressed to John, who ** from that hour took her 
unto his own home." 

How, my young friend, do you treat your pa- 
rents, — their memory^ if they are dead — ihemselves^ 
if they are living 1 A very simple question, but 
the reply to which involves considerations to you 
of infinite importance. You cannot be an unduH' 
ful child^ andtn heir of heaven. The curse of God 
rests upon such. ** Cursed be he that setteth 
light by his father or his mother: and all the 
people shall say. Amen." 

See to it that you obey the command of God, 
and follow the example of Christ, in this matter, 
as you hope to be saved through his blood. 

There was a prophet by the name of Gad, (ed- 
ucated probably at the school of the prophets in 
Naioth, under the instruction of Samuel,) who 
appears to have been raised up to attend David 
in his trials, and who brought him, some time 
after his return from Mizpeh, a divine communi- 
cation. It was an order to leave his strong hold 
in the cave, and find a new station in the country 
of Judah. He immediately obeyed, and went 
with his men into the forest of Hareth. The pro- 
vidential reason of this seems to have been, the 
better to prepare David to rescue one of the 



78 DAVID. , 

towns of Judah from the hands of the Philistines, 
as we shall soon see was the case« 

In the meanwhile, Saul had heard of* this move- 
ment, and purposed to go in pursuit of David. 
He was encamped on a height near Giheah, his 
tent pitched under a tree there, and wielding his 
spear, the ensign of royalty, in the midst of 
those who were to accompany him on the ex- 
pedition. The address which he made to his 
men, shows the torturing jealousy which reigned 
within his hreast. Summoning them around him, 
he said : " Hear now, ye Benjamites, — will the 
son of Jesse give every one of you fields and 
vineyards, and make you all captains of thou- 
sands, and captains of hundreds ; that all of you 
have conspired against me, and there is none 
that showeth me that my son hath made a league 
with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you 
that is sorry for me, or showeth unto me that 
my son hath stirred up my servant against me, 
to lie in wait, as at this dayl" 

There was one present who was ready to come 
forth as the friend of the king, and to enter into 
the spirit of his revengeful feelings against Da- 
vid. It was Doeg the Edomite, of whom mention 
has already been made, and who, it will be re- 
collected, was at Nob at the time that David was 
there. He now informed Saul of this, and that 
David came to the high priest; the latter in- 
quiring of the Lord for him, and giving him 



tAVID. 79 

food, and the sword of Goliath the Philistine.* 
The enraged monarch had now an object on 
which to wreak his vengeance. He despatched 
messengers immediately, who brought before 
him not only Ahimelech, but " all his father's 
house, the priests that were in Nob." Saul de- 
manded the respectful attention of the high 
priest, " Hear now, thou son of Ahitab." 
He answered, " Here I am, my lord." 
The king proceeded : " Why have ye conspir- 
ed against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that 
thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast 
inquired of God for him, that he should rise 
against me, to lie in wait as at this day 1" 

Ahimelech was conscious of his innocence, 
and knew that he received David as one high in 
favor with the king, and, as he supposed, on im- 
portant public business. It was not the first time 
that he had inquired of the Lord for David, and 
why should he have deemed it criminal in this 
instance, or displeasing to Saul. In view of these 
things, he thus expostulated with the king : 

♦ But he did not mention a very important circumstance 
with which he was undoubtedly acquainted, and which 
would have placed the conduct of Ahimelech in a different 
light, — that of David's declaring that he was on the busi- 
ness of the king. Doeg evidently intended to produce the 
impression that the high priest was privy to the move- 
ments of David, and willing to aid him in them. He thus 
proved himself a base and malicious slanderer. 



80 DAVID. 

" Who is so faithful among all thy servants as 
David, which is the king's son-in-law, and goeth 
at thy bidding, and is honorable in thine house 1 
Did I then begin to inquire of God for him 1 be 
it far from me : let not the king impute any 
thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of 
my father : for thy servant knew nothing of all 
this, less or more." 

It was a reasonable and touching appeal, but 
produced no other effect upon Saul than to rouse 
to a higher degree of fury the malevolent pas- 
sions that had the mastery over him. " Thou 
shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy 
father's house." So saying, he ordered «ome of 
the footmen who were near him, immediately to 
put Ahimekch and the other priests of the Lord 
to death; "because," he added, " their hand also 
is with David, and because they knew when he 
fled, and did not show it to me." 

Jealousy and revenge, when they take full pos- 
session of the soul, as in the case of Saul, are 
inexorable. They are deaf to the voice of rea- 
son. Neither justice nor humanity can arrest 
them in their furious career. They urge on to 
deeds of violence and blood. They complete the 
fiendlike character of the murderer and the as- 
sassin. 

These passions have their beginnings, and 
acquire their growth in malignity by degrees 
Reader, are they ever harbored in your breast 1 



DAVID. 81 

If SO, pause and consider their issve. They had 
their beginnings in the breast of Saul. 



CHAPTER XII. 



Doeg slays the priests, except Abiathar, -who escapes. Da- 
vid succors E^eilahl Jonathan and David renew their 
covenant. Saul leaves the pursuit of David, to resist the 
Philistines. 

The command to kill the priests on the spot, 
and in cold blood, struck those to whom it was 
given with horror. They could not raise their 
hands, even in obedience to the orders of their 
sovereign, against those who ministered at the 
altars of Jehovah. Not one moved ; and it would 
seem as if their refusal might have produced at 
least a momentary pause in the mind of Saul, 
and stayed a little his vengeance. But it only 
roused it to a more maddening impetuosity. His 
eye flashed terribly with an exulting decision of 
purpose, as it feH upon one near him, on whom 
he knew he could rely to carry that purpose into 
execution. It was Doeg, the Edomite ; the ready 
tool of the royal murderer. " Turn thou," said 
Saul, addressing him, " and fall upon the priests." 

There was no misgiving now. The command 

David. 6 



82 J)AVID. 

found immediate obedience ; and his unresisting 
victims, to the number of eighty-five, fell by the 
hand of Doeg. The vindictive spirit of Saul car- 
ried the work of destruction yet further ; intend- 
ing, probably, by such fearful examples, to strike 
terror into his subjects, and put a stop to their 
rendering any more aid to David. By his di- 
rections, Doeg proceeded with a party of men to 
Nob, the city of the priests, and put all its inha- 
bitants to death, not sparing the aged, nor the 
children and tender infants, and destroying all 
the cattle. About this time David is supposed to 
have composed the 52d, 109th, 17th, MOth, 35th, 
and 64th Psalms. 

In these events, brought about by the wicked- 
ness of Saul, and in which he and the instru- 
ments of his vengeance incurred tremendous 
guilt, we see, at the same time, a striking fulfil- 
ment of the Divine prediction against Eli and his 
descendants. He had grievously ofi^ended God, 
because his sons had made themselves vile, and he 
restrained them noty and had been told that the 
days would come when the Lord would cut off his 
arm^ and the arm of his father^ s hovse^ and that all 
the increase of his house should die in the flower 
of their age. 

This prediction began to receive its' accom- 
plishment when the two sons of Eli were killed 
in battle, and himself died on the same day. It 
continued to be fulfiUed in the massacre of the 



DAVID. 83 

priests ; and we shall have occasion to notice its 
consummation in the deposition, of Abiathar, the 
high priest, by Solomon, and the subsequent de- 
gradation of his family. 

For Abiathar, one of the sons of Ahimelech, 
contrived to escape when the slaughter of his 
father atid kindred took place, and fled imme- 
diately to David for protection. The latter, on 
being informed by him of that horrible event, 
exclaimed, " 1 knew it that day, when Doeg the 
Edomite was the^ e, that he would surely tell Sanl : 
I have occasioned the death of all the persons of 
thy father's house." On every account, there- 
fore, he found himself bound to defend Abiathar 
against the vengeance of Saul, and added ; " Abide 
thou with me, fear not : for he that seeketh my 
life seeketh thy life : but with me thou shalt be 
in safeguard." 

Abiathar brought with him th6 ephod, and pro- 
bably the Urim and Thummim, which had hitherto 
been appropriated to the service of Saul; thus 
enabling David, as we shall soon see, to consult 
the oracle of God for direction in his affairs. 

It happened, at this time, that the Philistines, 
taking advantage of the distracted affairs of the 
Israelites, invaded their country, and attacked 
Keilah, a town in the tribe of Judah, committing 
extensive depredations, and carrying pff the grain 
which the inhabitants had gathered and were 
threshing in the adjoining fields. 



84 DAVID. 

Keilah was not far from the forest of Hareth, 
where David and his men, about six hundred in 
number, were concealed. He was told of what 
the Philistines were doing, and his patriotic spirit 
was immediately roused to go to the relief of his 
countrymen. But he would not do this without 
inquiring of the Lord for direction. This he pro- 
bably did through Abiathar, the high-priest, who 
was with him, and received the reply, " Go and 
smite the Philistines, and save Keilah." 

But his men dreaded the enterprise. They said 
they had already dangers enough to encounter, 
without making their case the more desperate by 
going out to attack the Philistines. To satisfy 
them, David inquired again of the Lord, and was 
told to arise, and go down to Keilah, for God 
would deliver the Philistines into his hands. 
There was no more hesitation. He and his party 
went resolutely forward. They rescued Keilah, 
obtaining a complete victory over the enemy, 
bringing away their cattle, and smiting them with 
a great slaughter. 

Such a generous and heroic deed David had good 
reason to suppose would secure the gratitude of 
the inhabitants of Keilah, and afford him and his 
men at least a temporary shelter within their 
walls. But it proved far otherwise. Saul, having 
heard of what had happened, expressed his joy at 
the event. He exultingly exclaimed that God had 
now delivered David into his hands, (inasmuch 



DAVID. 85 

as the latter and his party could easily he taken 
prisoners, heing shut up in a town that had gates 
and hars,) and immediately summoned his soldiers 
to assemhle, that he might go and hesiege Keilah. 

David was informed of this movement, and, 
through Ahiathar, sought once more the Divine 
direction in so critical an emergency. He was 
told that Saul was fully resolved to come down 
to the city, and that the inhabitants would be 
ready to deliver him up into the hands of his 
enemy. He hesitated not a moment what course 
to take. He withdrew from Keilah, and, wander- 
ing about from place to place, at length sought a 
refuge in a mountainous and retired hold in the 
wilderness of Ziph between Hebron and the Dead 
Sea. (See Psalm 31.) In the meanwhile, Saul, 
having heard of David's escape from Keilah, for- 
bore to go thither, using, however, all the means 
in his power to ascertain where David was, and 
to surprise him and his party, but without sCic- 
cess. " Saul sought him every day, but God 
delivered him not into his hand." 

In the midst of such severe trials, David was 
much comforted and encouraged by a visit from 
his friend Jonathan. The latter knew his place 
of concealment, and met him privately in the 
recesses of a thick wood, there to tender to him 
the sympathy which he so much needed, and to 
convince him that the attachment which they had 
mutually long since formed had sufl^ered no di 



86 DAVID. 

minution. In doing this, Jonathan, we are told, 
inspired David with new confidence in the Al- 
mighty, "and strengthened his hand in God." — 
" Fear not," said he, " for the hand of Saul my 
father shall not find thee ; and thou shalt he king 
over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee ; and 
that also Saul my father knoweth." 

The interview of the two friends was a hurried, 
but deeply interesting one, and before they sepa- 
rated they renewed their solemn covenant with 
each other, calling upon the Lord to witness the 
sincerity of the transaction, and invoking his 
blessing upon them. 

But if David had thus one faithful, devoted 
friend, he was surrounded, also, by many treache- 
rous enemies. The Ziphites, who knew where he 
and his men were hiding themselves, formed the 
purpose of betraying him into the power of Saul. 
With this object in view, some of them went to 
Gibeah where the king was, informing him of 
David's strong holds, and promising, if he would 
come do>vn, to deliver David into his hands. 

" Blessed be ye of the Lord ;" said Saul, "for 
ye have compassion on me. Go, I pray you, 
prepare yet, and know and see his place where 
his haunt is, and who hath seen him there : for it 
is told me that he dealeth very subtilely. See 
therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking- 
places where he hideth himself, and come ye 
again to me with the certainty, and I will go with 



DAVID. 87 

you : and it shall come to pass, if he be in the 
land, that I will search him out throughout all 
the thousands of Judah." 

It was not long before the Ziphites gave Saul 
such intelligence that he set out with a body of 
armed men in quest of David. The latter, being 
aware of the movement, concealed himself, with 
his followers, in a retreat in the rocky fastnesses 
of the wilderness of Maon, a mountainous region 
in the most southern parts of the tribe of Judah. 
Saul pursued after him, advancing on one side of 
the mountain, while David and his party, on the 
other, were endeavoring to elude the search, and 
to avoid being encompassed by their enemies. At 
this critical juncture, a messenger came in great 
haste to inform Saul that the Philistines had in- 
vaded the land, and were pouring themselves into 
it in vast numbers. The danger from this quarter 
was so pressing, that the king, for the present, 
abandoned the pursuit of his intended victim, and 
hastened to defend his territories against an old 
and formidable enemy. 

Thus David's earnest supplications for deliver- 
ance in the fifty-fourth Psalm, which it is sup- 
posed he wrote when in this extreme peril, were 
signally answered by the interposition of Provi- 
dence in his behalf; and he might well say, 

" I will praise thy name, O Lord ! for it is good. 

** For he hath delivered me out of all trouble ; 

" And mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies." 



88 DAVID. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



David spares Saul's life, who returns home. Samuel 
dies. Nabal's condition and character. 

David now felt that another change was neces- 
sary for his security, and retired with his men to 
the strong holie of En-gedi. This place took its 
name probahly from its situation among lofty, 
precipitous rocks that overhang the valleys be- 
neath. A fountain of pure water rises near the 
summit, which the inhabitants call En-gedi, — the 
fountain of the goat, — because it is hardly acces- 
sible to any other creature. It was called also 
Hazazon-Tamar, — the city of palm-trees, — there 
being a great quantity around it. It stood near 
the Dead Sea, in a south-easterly direction from 
Jerusalem, and was remarkable, also, for the fruit- 
ful vineyards in its vicinity. 

Saul, having driven out the Philistines, and 
being apprised by his emissaries of David's new 
lurking-place, took with him three thousand 
chosen men, to renew his search among the 
rocks of En-gedi. In some of these rocks were 
vast caves, in which it was customary for the 
shepherds and their flocks to lodge; and in the 
deep recesses of one of them, David and his 



DAVID. 89 

band had secreted themselves. On his way up 
the mountain, Saul entered this very cave, and 
probably laid himself down near its entrance, to 
take a little repose in sleep. It is easy to con- 
ceive what alarm this excited among David and 
his followers. Their persecutor whom they so 
much dreaded, seemed already to have them 
within his grasp. Nothing but the most prompt 
and decided measures could save them. The 
necessity was inexorable ; and they thought the 
death of Saul alone would afford them any pros- 
pect of escape. In the consternation among his 
men, which such an unexpected and dishearten- 
ing event would produce, they might easily fight 
their way through their enemies, and retreat from 
immediate danger. The most resolute crowded 
around David. They urged him to the deed of 
which they said his duty, both to himself and his 
followers, demanded the performance. They even 
pleaded what they considered the interposition of 
Providence in his behalf, as a clear indication of 
the will of Jehovah, and a signal fulfilment of 
the Divine promise, either real or pretended, 
which had been made to him. "Behold," said 
they, "the day of which the Lord said unto thee. 
Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine 
hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem 
good unto thee." 

What a crisis ! How will David act 1 Will it 
be safe for him to forego the advantage which 



90 DAVID. 

he now has over his inveterate and dreaded ene- 
my 1 Does not self-preservation alone call loudly 
for putting Saul to death, and will it not justify 
the deed 1 How soon, too, may the removal of 
the king prepare the way for David's ascending 
the throne, and thus gratify his youthful ambi- 
tion with the glory of dominion over a great and 
prosperous people. 

But conscience speaks. It forbids him to raise 
his hand against the rightful ruler of the nation, 
to whom he owes allegiance. A generous and 
heroic magnanimity will not suffer him to shed 
the blood of Saul, defenceless and in his power. 
He is the father of Jonathan, and how can he in- 
flict such anguish upon a faithfuj and beloved 
friend. His purpose is formed. He will do no 
harm to the king. He approaches him, however, 
with caution, and without disturbing him cuts off 
the skirt of his robe, intending to keep it as a 
proof that he had his enemy completely at his 
mercy, and to convince Saul that he had no 
treacherous designs against him. 

He returned to his men, but not without a deep 
misgiving at what he had done, so respectful and 
loyal were his feelings towards his sovereign. He 
feared, too, their disappointment and impetuosity. 
It was necessary that they should be restrained 
by the interposition of his authority. " The Lord 
forbid," said he, " that I should do this thing unto 
my master, the Lord's anointed, to stretch forth 



DAVID. 91 

my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed 
of the Lord." 

" So David," we are told, " stayed his servants 
with these words, and suffered them not to rise 
against Saul." 

Have you ever, my young friend, felt the spirit 
of retaliation towards one who had injured youl 
Have you ever had an occasion present itself 
which seemed to invite, and even to urge the ne- 
cessity of inflicting some evil upon your enemy, 
that you might save yourself from harm 1 How 
did vou act at such a crisis 1 Did you yield to 
the suggestions of a selfish and malignant re- 
venge 1 Did you feel nothing of the meek and 
forgiving temper which the Gospel enjoins, nor 
of that magnanimous generosity of soul which 
despises the very thought of taking vengeance 
upon one, how much soever he may deserve it, 
who, at the time, is unahle to make any resist- 
ance! What, now, are your reflections upon 
your past conduct 1 Does conscience approve of 
it ] Would you do so again, if placed in similar 
circumstances 1 Can you still cherish such feel- 
ings, and dare to offer up the petition which our 
Savior taught his disciples daily to present before 
the throne of grace, — Forgive us our debts, as we 
forgive our debtors ! Remember his solemn decla- 
ration $ "If ye forgive not men their trespasses^ 
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." 

Saul, not knowing what had happened, soon 



92 DAVID. 

rose and left the cave. David followed him, and 
arrested his attention by exclaiming, " My lord 
the king," and, when Saul looked round, ** stoop- 
ed with his face to the earth, and bowed himself. 
And David said to Saul, wherefore hearest thou 
men's words, saying. Behold, David seeketh thy 
hurti Behold, this day thine eyes have seen 
how that the Lord hath delivered thee to-day 
into mine hand in the cave: and some bade 
me kill thee : but mine eye spared thee ; and I 
said, I will not put forth mine hand against my 
lord 5 for he is the Lord's anointed. Moreover, 
my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in 
my hand : for in that I cut off the skirt of thy 
robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that 
there is neither evil nor transgression in mine 
hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet 
thou huntest my soul to take it. The Lord judge 
between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me 
of thee : but mine hand shall not be upon thee. 
As saith the proverb of the ancients, wickedness 
proceedeth from the wicked :** — (Jf I had been 
so guilty as to conspire with others against thee^ 
I should surely have been depraved enough to hill 
thee when I had thee in my power :) — " but mine 
hand shall not be upon thee. After whom is the 
king of Israel come out 1 after whom dost thou 
pursue 1 After a dead dog, after a flea \ — (so in- 
significant a person, that he is unable to do thee 
any harm.) — "The Lord therefore.be judge, and 



DAVID. 93 

judge between me and thee ; and see, and plead 
my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand." 

The more generous feelings of Saul seem to 
have been touched by this appeal of David. " Is 
this thy voice, my son David 1 And Saul lifted 
up his voice, and wept. And he said to David, 
Thou art more righteous than I ; for thou hast 
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee 
evil. And thou hast showed this day how that 
thou bast dealt well with me : forasmuch as when 
the Lord had delivered me into thy hand, thou 
killedst me not. For if a man find his enemy 
will he let him go well awayl wherefore the 
Lord reward thee good for that thou bast done 
unto me this day. And now, behold, I know well 
that thou shalt surely be king, and that the king- 
dom of Israel shall be established in thine hand. 
Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that 
thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that 
thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's 
house." 

David was ready to comply with this re- 
quest, and called God to witness that he would 
faithfully abide by his promise made to the king. 
Saul then returned home with his forces, while 
David, still apprehensive of danger, sought a 
place of security with his men in some one of the 
itrong holds in the neighborhood.* 

• David is supposed, while in the cave of En-gedi, lo have 
composed Psalms 57, 58, and 63. 



♦ 94 DAVID. 

About this time the prophet Samuel died, hav- 
ing reached the advanced age of nearly a hun- 
dred years 5 and " all the Israelites," we are told, 
" were gathered together, and lamented him, and 
buried him in his house at Ramah ;" that is, as 
we have reason to believe this expression intends, 
in the sepulchre he had prepared for his burial, 
near his dwelling, and probably in the garden at- 
tached to it. 

The death of this illustrious and beloved man, 
produced a deep sensation throughout the whole 
country. An immense number of people were 
assembled at Ramah, from all parts of the land, 
to attend his funeral i and the mourning for his 
loss, which probably continued during thirty days, 
so engrossed the public attention that quite a 
respite was afforded David from the persecution 
of Saul, and he had the opportunity of moving 
from place to place with little or no fear of mo- 
lestation. He left the strong holds where he and 
his men had secreted themselves, and went down 
to the wilderness of Paran. This was a desert 
in Arabia Petroea, south of Judea, and north- 
west of the Elanitic, or eastern gulf of the Red 
Sea. ^ere an occurrence took place of a deeply 
eventful character in the life of David 

In Maon, a city not far xlistant, there dwelt a 
man of great wealth, whose name was Nabal. 
Among other possessions, he had three thousand 
6heep, and a thousand goats, which he fed in the 



DAVID. 95 

neighborhood of Carmel, a city of Judah, on a 
mountain of the same name, about ten miles east 
of Hebron. His wife, whose name was Abigail, 
was " a woman of good understanding, and of a 
beautiful countenance : but the man was churlish 
and evil in his doings." His name seemed to be 
an appropriate one 5 for it signifies to be/oo/wA, 
base, or villanous ; and some think, that his be- 
ing said to be " of the house of Caleb," or a Caleb- 
He, rather refers to his surly, snappish temper, 
— as the word caleb in Hebrew, means a dog. At 
any rate, he was of a very selfish, cynical dispo* 
sition, as we shall soon see. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

David determines to punish Naba), but is appeased by his 
wife, Abigail. Nabal dies suddenly. 

Nabal, at this time, had a large sheep-shearing 
at Carmel. The shepherds who had the charge 
of his flocks were there, with others employed 
for the purpose, and many of his friends and ac- 
quaintance. It was an occasion among the Is- 
raelites of great festivity, and a very generous 
entertainment was usually provided for those who 
were present. 

David heard of this, and felt that he and his 



96 DAVID. 

followers might ask, without presumption, for a 
small share of the good things of which the 
guests were to participate. For he had lately- 
rendered Nahal a service of no small account. 
The flocks of the latter were led hy the shep- 
herds, in quest of pasture, into the very region 
where David and his men had their temporary 
ahode; and had not only, received from them 
no molestation, hut found a cordial welcome, to- 
gether with that protection which was so much 
needed against the hordes of Arabs who were 
often prowling in the neighborhood for plunder. 
If David had actually demanded something in 
the way of compensation for this protection, it 
would have been only what was justly due to 
himself and his men ; but he chose rather to re- 
ly on the generosity of Nabal. He was much in 
need of provisions, and at such d season of pros- 
perity on the part of the owner of the flocks, he 
thought he might safely ask to partake of the 
very abundance for which Nabal was not a little 
indebted to him and his followers. His request 
was made in the most modest and delicate man- 
ner. He chose ten of his young men to bear 
the message, and said to them ; ^^ Get you up to 
Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my 
name : And thus shall ye say to him that liveth 
in prosperity. Peace be both to thee, and peace 
be to thine house, and peace be unto all that 
thou hast. And now I have heard that thou 



DAV1D» 97 

hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were 
with us, we hurt them not, neither was there 
aught missing unto them all the while they 
were in Carmel. Ask thy young men, and they 
will show thee," — leaving it for the shepherds 
of Nabal to inform him more particularly of the 
important protection which the flocks had re- 
ceived. "Wherefore let the young men find 
favor in thine eyes 5 for we come Jn a good day : 
give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine 
hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David." 

The reply of Nabal was what might have been 
expected from one of so mean and selfish a 
character. "Who is David 1" said he to the 
young men, " and who is the son of Jesse 1 
there be many servants now-a-days that break 
away every man from his master. Shall I then 
take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that 
I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto 
men, whom I know not whence they be 1" 

When the messengers of David, on their re- 
turn, told him what Nabal had said, his indigna- 
tion was roused, and he threatened to take the 
most exemplary vengeance upon one who had 
treated him so shamefully after the signal ser- 
vices which he had rendered him ; ^declaring that 
not a male in the employment of Nabal should be 
spared to behold the light of the ensuing morn- 
ing. He immediately ordered four hundred of 
his men to gird on their swords, and accompany 

David. * 



^8 DAVID. 

him on the expedition, two hundred remaining 
to guard the women and children and what was 
left behind. His orders were obeyed, and the 
whole party were soon on their way to Carmel. 

In the meanwhile, one of Nabal's young men 
had told his wife how he had treated the mes- 
sage sent to him by David; adding that David 
and his followers had been very kind to them. 
"We were not hurt," said he, "neither missed 
we any thing, so long as we were conversant 
with them, when we were in the fields. They 
were a wall unto us by night and day, all the 
while we were with them keeping the sheep. 
Now therefore know and consider what thou 
wilt do 5 for evil is determined against aur mas- 
ter, and against all his household; for he is such 
a son p( Belial that a man cannot speak to him." 

Abigail saw, at once, the impending danger, 
and that no time was to be lost in averting it. 
She knew her husband too well to cause any de- 
lay by making known to him her fears, and con- 
ferring with him about what was to be done* In- 
deed, she doubted whether be would be disposed 
to say or do any thing to appease the resentment 
of David. She resolved to take the whole mat- 
ter into her own hands, and act as well as she 
could in so trying an emergency. 

She prepared a generous present for David 
with all possible despatch, — two hundred loaves, 
and two botfles of wine, (made probably of goat- 



OAYJD 99 

skins, and holding a large quantity,) and five 
sheep ready dressed, and hve measures of parch* 
ed corn, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and 
two hundred cakes of figs. These were placed 
on asses, under the care of servants whom she 
directed to proceed immediately on their way, 
while she followed them, riding on an animal of 
the same kind. It was not long hefore they met 
David, approaching at the head of his armed 
hand. As soon as Abigail saw him, **she hast- 
ed, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David 
on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, 
and fell at his feet." 

He stopped, with his men, in their course, to 
know the object of this unexpected salutation, 
and was accosted by Abigail in the following 
eloquent and pathetic address. 

" Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity 
be : and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in 
thine audience, and hear the words of thine hand- 
maid. Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this 
man of Belial, even Nabal : for as his name is, so 
is he ; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him : 
but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of 
my lord, whom thou didst send. Now therefore, 
my lord, as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, 
seeing the Lord hath withholden thee from coming 
to shed blood, and from avenging thyself with 
thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they 
that reek evil to my lord, be as Nabal. And now 



100 DAVID. 

this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought 
unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young 
men that follow my lord. I pray thee, forgive 
the trespass of thine handmaid: for the Lord 
will certainly make my lord a sure house ; be- 
cause my lord fighteth the battles of the Lord, 
and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days. 
Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek 
thy soul : but the soul of my lord shall be bound 
in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God; and 
the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling 
out, as out of the middle of a sling. And it shall 
come to pass, when the Lord shall have done to 
my lord according to all the. good that he hath 
spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed 
thee ruler OTer Israel ; that this shall be no grief 
unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, 
either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or 
that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the 
Lord shall have dealt well with my lord, then 
remember thine handmaid." 

David was struck with the beauty and dignified 
aspect of the female who thus addressed him. 
He could not but admire the ingenuity, and feel 
deeply the touching eloquence of her appeal. 
She spoke, too, to his conscience, and convinced 
him of the folly and the guilt of seeking to gra- 
tify his resentment for the insult he had received. 
His reply shows that he had acted under the sud- 
den impulse of passion, and that his sense of 



DAVID. 101 

duty could thus be moved to regain its empire in 
his breast. 

" Blessed be the Lord God of Israel," said he, 
" which sent thee this day to meet me : and bless- 
ed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast 
kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and 
from avenging myself with mine own hand." He 
then went on to say that as surely as the Lord 
lived, who had thus intc^rposed to keep him back 
from the accomplishment of his purpose, if she 
had not hasted to meet him on his way, not a 
male among the attendants of Nabal would have 
been left alive to behold the light of the coming 
day. 

David, after receiving from Abigail the presents 
which she had brought him, courteously took 
leave of her ; telling her to go up in peace to 
her house, for her expostulation with him had 
prevailed. 

On her return she found her husband in the 
midst of a sumptuous feast, (like the feast of a 
king,) carousing with his guests, and in a state of 
deep intoxication. She was too prudent, under 
such circumstances, to say any thing to him of 
her interview with David. In the morning, when 
he had come to his senses, she informed him of 
it. He was struck with horror at his narrow 
escape from the catastrophe which threatened 
him \ and the shock was so great that " his heart 
died within him, and he became as a stone." Hi« 



102 DAVID* 

malady, whatevei it was, made sucli rapid pro- 
gress, that the Lord smote him about ten days 
after, and he expired. It was a striking judgment, 
brought by divine Providence upon this besotted 
man, and coming upon him, too, as the just and 
natural consequence of his own meanness, foUy 
and wickedness. 

The Lord knows how to overtake sinners in 
their iniquity, and to cause them to reap the bit- 
ter fruits of their own doings. He can easily so 
direct and overrule the most common events^ as 
to make them conspire, in a sure and often won- 
derful manner, to accomplish the designs of his 
justice. Beware, my young friend, lest your sins, 
if not repented of and forsaken, thus overwhelm 
you with disgrace and ruin. They may already 
be ripening for this result. Be not like the fool- 
ish Nabal, but hasten, as did Abigail, to avert the ^ 
impendmg evil. 



OAYID 103 



CHAPTER XV. 



David marries Abigail, and also Ahinoam. David again 
spares Saul's life, who blesses David, and returns home. 
David flees to Gath, and dwells there some lime. 

The news of Nabal's death soon reached the 
ears of David, who now rejoiced more than ever 
that he had been restrained from imbruing his 
hands in the blood of one whom God himself had 
thus seen fit to punish in so exemplary a manner. 
" Blessed be the Lord," he exclaimed, " that hath 
pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand 
of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil : 
for the Lord hath returned the wickedness of 
Nabal upon his own head." / 

Not long after this event, for such was the cus- 
tom of the times, David sent a message to Abi- 
gail, to see if she would become his wife. She 
consented, though with much diffidence ; dis- 
trusting her itness to be the companion of one 
who was destined to fill so exalted a station as 
she knew awaited him. She arose to receive the 
messengers, " and bowed herself on her face to 
the earth, and said. Behold, let thine handmaid 
be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of 
my lord." Returning with them, accompanied 
by five of her female attendants, she reached the 



104 DAVID. 

place where David was, and, with the usual mar 
riage ceremonies, they hecame hushand and wife. 

But she was not his only wife. His first wife, 
indeed, Michal, had heen given hy her father 
Saul to Phalti, to cut off all pretensions of David 
to the throne. But he had still, as it would seem, 
another wife, Ahinoam of Jezreel, when he mar- 
ried Abigail. He was tolerated in this by the 
Mosaic law; but it was not in accordance with 
the original institution of the marriage relation, 
and was a custom which produced great evils in 
domestic life. The followers of Christ are taught 
their duty by him, in this respect, in the most 
explicit manner ; and it is enjoined by an apostle, 
Let every man have his own wife^ and let every 
woman have her own hushand. 

How long David continued in the wilderness 
of Paran is uncertain ; perhaps a few months, 
when he went again to his former haunts in the 
neighborhood of Ziph. The inhabitants of that 
city once more sent messengers to Saul at Gibeah 
to let him know this, and, with three thousand 
chosen soldiers, he went in pursuit of David. 
Coming to the hill of Hachilah, they pitched 
their tents, waiting for more certain intelligence 
with regard to the object of their search. In the 
meanwhile, David, who was secreting himself, 
with his men, in the retired holds of the wilder- 
ness, was informed by his spies of Saul's ap- 
proach, and of the place of his encampment. He 



DAVID. 105 

came, with two attendants, Abishai his nephew^ 
and Ahimelech, a Hittite, to reconnoitre the spot, 
and got near enough, unobserved, to notice the 
position of Saul as he lay asleep, and also of 
Abner, his principal commander. Waiting tiP 
the deeper darkness of the night afibrded more 
security, David inquired which of the two would 
go with him into the very camp of Saul. It was 
a perilous adventure, and, by making this inquiry, 
he wished to ascertain on whom he could rely to 
attend him with a ready and unflinching courage. 

Abishai immediately offered to go. They ad- 
vanced cautiously to the place where Saul was 
sleeping; his spear being stuck in the ground 
by the bolster on which his head reclined, and a 
cruse of water near it. Abishai was eager to 
make a speedy use of so favorable an occasion 
to despatch the inveterate persecutor of David 
Accosting the latter in a low tone of voice, he 
said ; ** God hath delivered thine enemy into thine 
hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, 
I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth ai 
once, and I will not smite him th& second time." 

" Destroy him not," whispered David j " foi 
who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord'; 
anointed, and be guiltless. As the Lord liveth, 
the Lord shall smite him ; or his day shall come 
to die ; or he shall descend into battle and pc 
rish. The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth 
mine hand against the Lord's anointed : but 1 



106 DAVID. 

pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at hia 
bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go." 

Abishai did so, and handing the spear and the 
cruse to David, they immediately withdrew from 
the camp. No one was awaked, or even dis- 
turbed ; and it would seem that a peculiar inter- 
position of Providence afforded this security. 
For, we are told, " they were all asleep, because 
a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them." 

David and his nephew now ascended a hill at 4 
considerable distance, a wide interval being be* 
tween it and the camp of Saul. Here he raised 
his voice, and "cried to the people, and to Abner 
the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, 
Abnerl" » 

Abner, starting from his slumber, exclaimed ; 
" Who art thou that criest to the king V 

David's reply was full of bitter irony. "Art 
not thou a valiant man 1 and who is like to thee 
in I^ael 1 wherefore then hast thou not kept thy 
lord the king 1 for there came one of the^ people 
in to destroy the king thy lord. This thing is 
not good that thou hast done. As the Lord liveth, 
ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept 
your master, the Lord's anointed. And now see 
where the king's spear is, and th« cruse of water 
that was at his bolster." 

Saul recognized the voice, and inquired if it 
was that of David. " It is my voice," replied the 
latter, "my lord, O king. Wherefore doth my 



DAVID. 107 

lord thus pursoe after his servant 1 for what have 
I donel or what evil is in mine handl Now 
therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear 
the words of his servant. If the Lord have 
stirred thee up against me, let him accept an of- 
fering." (If I am indeed guilty of some heinous 
oflfence, and thou art the instrument, in the hands 
of Providence, of the divine vengeance, let me 
be put to death, and do thou present a thank-of- 
fering to the Lord for having thus been the minis* 
ter of his justice.) ** But if they be the children 
of men,'' (evil counsellors who have instigated 
thee to persecute one who is innocent, in so un- 
relenting a manner,)^* cursed be they before the 
Lord ; for they have driven me out this day from 
abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, 
Go, serve other gods." {They are the ones who 
deserve to suffer ; for they have been the cause 
of my being banished from the enjoyment of the 
religious privileges to which an Israelite is enti- 
tled, and forced to take refuge among idolaters^ 
telling me, as it were, to go and worship the 
false gods of the heathen.) " Now therefore, let 
not my blood fall to the earth before the face of 
the Lord : for the king of Israel is come out to 
seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in 
the mountains." 

Saul relented once more. He could not but ad- 
mire the magnanimity of David; and it seemed, 
for the moment, as if gratitude and a sense of 



108 DAVID. 

duty would gain a permanent ascc/ndency in his 
breast. " I have sinned !". he exclaimed, " return, 
my son David : for I will no more do thee harm, 
because my spul was precious in thine eyes this 
day: behold, I have played the fool, and have 
erred exceedingly." 

David, however, would not dare to trust him- 
self in the hands of one who had before made 
similar promises only to break them. Request- 
ing Saul to send one of his young men after his 
spear, David added these memorable words, show- 
ing his unshaken confidence in God, and his firm 
belief that the Judge of all the earth would main- 
tain the course of truth and justice 5 " The Lord 
render to every man his righteousness and his 
faithfulness : for the Lord delivered thee into my 
hand to-day, bat I would not stretch forth mine 
hand against the Lord's anointed. And, behold, 
as thy life was much set by this day in mine 
eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes 
of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all 
tribulation." 

Saul replied ; " Blessed be thou, my son David : 
thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt 
still prevail 1" Wonderful power of conscience, 
even in the breast of a very wicked man ! What 
a contrast between the knowing of what is right, 
and the doing of it ! O the depths of depravity in 
the human heart, when the sinful passions are so 
strong as to break loose, in their mad career, from 



131 

the rest, Jona- 
« served ti> dis- 
They gave np 
ijamay ou their 
* by the Pliilis- 
'le carnage the 
ifd in>Dn .Said, 
aim was too 
wounded by 
md mortiiii^d 
iind of a rhi- 
e called upon 
** Draw thy 
me through 
!'d come and 
T.'* But the 
ir from com- 
lot be so pro- 
ts sovcreig^ii, 
im to do U, 
lenmtive, and 
fjtL He took 
armOF'bearcr, 
fid fiilling up- 
' marked w'nh 
ig[ He lived 
ons. He died 



litid driven to 
armur-t^arer 



130 DAVID. 

*- 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Saul and his army are defeated. He kills himself. The 
men of Jabesh-Gliead remove the bodies of Sam and 
his sons from Beth-shan, and bury the bones at Jabesh. 

There is reason to believe, that it was during 
the night of the eighth day from David's depar- 
ture from the army of the Philistines at Aphek, 
that Saul went to £n-dor. This furnishes the 
proper length of time, to have intervened be- 
tween that movement of David and his return 
to Ziklag after the victory over the Amalekites. 

Saul, on reaching the camp, must have watch- 
ed the approach of the morning light with the 
most fearful forebodings. Exhausted with fa- 
tigue and the loss of sleep, overwhelmed with 
anxiety, and anticipating the speedy and terrible 
fulfilment of the prophet's denunciation, he was 
poorly prepared for the attack which the Philis- 
tines were now meditating upon him. As the 
day dawned, their troops began to be in motion, 
and were soon prepared for the onset. The Is- 
raelites, too, were marshalled to receive them. 
The conflict began. It was a severe one. Feats 
of personal bravery were conspicuous on both 
sides. But the tide of victory soon turned in 
favor of the Philistines. Saul and his army fled. 
They were pursued by the enemy, and vast num 



DkAVID. 131 

bers of them slain ; and among the rest, Jona- 
than and his two brothers. This served to dis- 
hearten the Israelites the more. They gave up 
all for lost. A scene of universal dismay on their 
part, and of still greater slaughter by the Philis- 
tines, ensued. In the midst of the carnage the 
archers of the enemy pressed hard upon Saul.' 
They marked their victim. Their aim was too 
successful, and he was grievously wounded by 
their arrows. Despairing of life, and mortified 
at the thought of falling by the hand of a Phi- 
listine, in the agony of despair he called upon 
his armor-bearer to despatch him. " Draw thy 
sword," he exclaimed, ** and thrust me through 
therewith $ lest these uncircumcised come and 
thrust me through, and abuse me." But the 
armor-bearer shrunk back with fear from com- 
plying with the request. He dared not be so pre- 
sumptuous as to take the life of his sovereign, 
even when the latter commanded him to do it. 

Saul felt that there was no alternative, and 
that he must perish by his own hand. He took 
the sword, as some think, of the armor-bearer, 
or as is more probablcj his own, and falling up- 
on it, expired. Sad close of a life marked with 
transgression, and ended by suicide ! He lived 
the slave of violent and sinful passions. He died 
as the fool dieth* 

Struck with horror at the sight, and driven to 
the madness of desperation, the armor-bearer 



1 32 DAVID. 

followed the example of Saul, and falling like- 
wise upon his own sword, put an end to his life. 

** So Saul died, and his three sons, and his 
armor-bearer, and all his men," (his principal 
officers, and those who were immediately about 
his person,) and, as we are told in another place, 
(1 Chron. 10:6.) "all his house," (every branch 
of his family that followed him to the war,) 
"that same day together." He had reigned 
over Israel forty years. 

The rout of the army of the Israelites, with the 
death of Saul and his sons, threw the whole sur- 
rounding country into consternation ; and the in- 
habitants dwelling near the Jordan, on both sides 
of the river, fleeing in all directions, abandoned 
the cities belonging to them, which were imme- 
diately taken possession of by the Philistines. 

The day after the battle the conquerors came 
to obtain what valuable booty they could from 
the bodies of those who had fallen in the field j 
and to increase the joy of their triumph, they 
found the king of Israel and his three sons 
among the slain. In the spirit of barbarous ex- 
ultation, stripping Saul of his armor, and sever- 
ing his head from his body, they sent it round 
into all parts of their land, to have it exhibited in 
the temples of their idols, as a trophy of their 
victory, and to publish the news of their success 
to their countrymen. It was placed, at last, in 
the temple of Dagon, and his armor in that of 



DAVID. 13:^ 

Ashtaroth. His body, and the bodies of his sons, 
they fastened, probably by means of iron hooks, 
•to the walls of Beth-shan. This was a city of 
the Philistines, more generally known by the 
name of Scythopolis, seventy-five miles north of 
Jerusalem, and fifteen or twenty miles south of 
the lake of Tiberias, on the west of the Jordan. 

On the east side of this river, in the half tribe 
of Manasseh, some fifteen or twenty miles from 
Beth-shan, was the city of Jabesh-Gilead, belong- 
ing to the Israelites, at the foot of the mountains 
of Gilead. Its inhabitants, it will be recollected, 
were rescued by Saul, at the commencement of 
his reign,, from Nahash, the king of the Ammo 
nites, and saved from the deep degradation which 
was about to be inflicted upon them by that cru- 
el tyrant. They remembered this timely succor 
with the liveliest gratitude, and, when they 
heard of the insult which had been offered to 
the bodies of Saul and of his sons, were filled 
with indignation at the authors of it. They re- 
solved to wipe off this disgrace, and to pay the 
last tribute of regard to the remains of their 
late monarc^h and his offspring. A band of their 
most valiant men, taking advantage of the dark- 
ness of the night, marched to Beth-shan, and 
succeeded in bringing back with them the dead 
bodies. 

It was now too late to embalm and bury them 
according to the usual custom. They were. 



134? DAVID. 

therefore, burned ; and the inhabitants of Jabesh- 
Gilead, after burying the bones and ashes under 
a tree, kept a solemn fast for seven days, in tes-' 
timony of their respect for the deceased. 

One short and striking epitaph, as it were, is left 
on the pages of inspiration, to teach us the rea- 
son why Saul fell under the displeasure of God, 
and came to such an untimely and humiliating 
end. Let it serve to remind us, that the divine 
justice is inflexible, and will, sooner or later 
inevitably overtake those who persist, hardened 
and impenitent, in the ways of sin. 

So Saul died for his transgression which he 
committed against the Lord^ even against the 
word of the Lordj which he kept noty and also for 
asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit^ 
to inquire of it; and inquired not of the Lord .• 
therefore he slew him^ and turned the kingdom 
unto David, the son of Jesse, 



DAVID. 135 



CHAPTER XIX. 



David's funeral song for Saul and Jonathan He goes to 

Hebron. 
\ 

On the third day after David's victorious re- 
turn to Ziklag, and while he ttiust have felt very 
anxious to learn the fate of the battle between 
the Israelites and the Philistines, a stranger ar- 
rived, '* with his clothes rent, and earth upon his 
head," as tokens of grief at some great calami- 
ty, who prostrated himself before David, when 
brought into his presence, in the most respect 
fill obeisance. On being asked whence he came, 
he replied that he had escaped from the camp 
of Saul. 

'* How went the matter V asked David, " I 
pray thee, tell me." 

" The people are fled from the battle," was 
the answer, " and many of the people also are 
fallen and dead ; and Saul and Jonathan his son 
are dead also." 

"How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan 
his son^be dead 1" inquired David with great 
solicitude. 

In reply, the young man said that he hap- 
pened by chance to be upon Mount Gilboa, and • 
saw Saul leanmg upon his spear, while the cha- 



136 DAVID. 

riots and horsemen of the enemy followed hard 
after him; that Saul looked hehind, and called 
to him ; and that on heing asked who he was, 
he answered that he was an Amalekite. He added, 
that Saul then begged him to slay him, heing in 
great anguish 5 because his life was yet whole 
in him, (though he was grievously, and as he 
probably thought, mortally wounded by the 
archers.) 

" So I stood upon him," continued the young 
man, ^* and slew him, because I was sure that he 
could not live after that he was fallen: and I 
took the crown that was upon his head, and the 
bracelet that was on his arnl, and have brought 
them hither unto my lord." 

The sight of these ensigns of royalty, com- 
bined with the circumstantial, and apparently 
true account of the Amalekite, seemed to re- 
move all doubts with regard to the death of the 
king and of Jonathan. In the overwhelming 
agony of grief, David rent his clothes, (for such 
was the custom,) as did, also, those who were 
with him, their garments. The lamentation was 
deep and general. "They mourned, and wept, 
and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan 
his son, and for the people, of the Lord, and for 
the house of Israel 5 because they were fallen by 
the sword." 

In the midst of his sorrow, David felt that he 
had an imperious duty to perform. As the king 



DAVID. 137 

elect of the nation, be considered himself bound 
to punish the individual with death who avowed 
that he had taken the life of the late sovereign. 
This was a crime of the deepest dye, although 
he was requested, as he declared, by Saul him- 
self to do it. Besides, David abhorred the thought 
of being exposed to the imputation which his 
enemies might bring against him, of being acces- 
sary to this crime, or of even conniving at it. 

'* Whence art thou 1" said he to the young 
man, who was again brought before him." 

" I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite," 
was the reply. 

'* How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth 
thine hand, to destroy the Lord's anointed 1" 
exclaimed David, and, immediately calling one 
of his young men, ordered him to put the Ama- 
lekite to death on the spot. It was done i while 
David added, " Thy blood be upon thy head ; 
for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, 
I have slain the Lord's anointed." 

Undoubtedly this young man hoped to ingra 
tiate himself with David by the intelligence which 
he brought ; and, still more by the false account 
which he gave of having himself taken the life 
of Saul, so as thus to put it beyond all doubt that 
the king was dead. The crown and the bracelet, 
too, which he either took on the field of battle 
from the body of Saul, or procured in some 
other way, he thought would be '-^ery acceptable 



1 38 DAVID. 

to David; and, without question, he was expect- 
ing for this, and for all that he had done, some 
valuable compensation, or gift, in return. His 
disappointment and summary punishment afford 
another striking proof how the providence of 
God can, in the natural course af events, inflict 
retributive justice upon the guilty. 

David, at this time, poured forth his sorrow 
at the death of Saul and Jonathan in a poeti* 
cal strain of lamentation, which stands unrivalled 
among compositions of a similar kind in any Ian-* 
guage. Just before its introduction in the sacred 
narrative, it is said, "he bade them teach the 
children of Judah the use of the Bow: behold, 
it is written in the book of Jash^r." Some sup- 
pose that this refers to David's causing the use 
of the bow to be introduced among his peoplp, 
when he became king, with which they had be- 
fore been unacquainted; as the Philistines did 
such execution with it at the battle in which 
Saul and his sons were slain. Others think, and 
perhaps with better reason, that the word bow is 
employed 'merely as the title of the song, or la- 
mentation, and in memory of the slaughter mode 
by the archers of the Philistines, or because 
David refers in it to the bow of Jonathan; and 
that he directed this song, called " The Bow," 
to be taught to the people of Judah and sung 
by them, as one of their national sacred songs 
through succeeding generations. Yhe book of 



DAVID. 139 

JoBher i% supposed by Lowth and others, to be a 
collection of these sacred songs, composed at dif- 
ferent times, and on different occasions, contain- 
ing this beautiful one among the rest« It is here in- 
serted) as deserving the header's particular notice 

*' The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places i 

Haw are the mighty fallen ! 

Tell it not in Gath, 

Publish it not in the streets of Askelon ; 

Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice. 

Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 

Ye mountains of Gilboa I let there be no dew, 

Neither let there be rain upon you, nor fields of offerings : 

For there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away. 

The shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed 

with oil. 
From the blood of the slain, 
From the fat of the mighty, 
The bow of Jonathan turned not back, 
And the sword of Saul returned not empty. 
Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant is their lives. 
And in their death they were not divided : 
They were swifter than eagles, 
They were stronger than lions. 
Ye daughters of Israel ! weep over Saul, 
Who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights ; 
Who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. 
How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle ! 

Jonathan ! thou wast slain in thy high places. 

1 am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan : 
Very pleasant hast thou been unto me; 
Thy love to me was wonderful, 

Passing the love of women. 
How are the mighty fallen, ^ 
And the weapons of war perished 1" 



140 DAVID. 

The affHirs of the Israelites were now in a 
most critical state. David knew this, and that he 
was the one chosen of God to fill the throne 
What course was it his duty to take in this 
emergency 1 It seemed to him highly important 
that he should no longer dwell at Ziklag, hut re- 
turn to his countrymen. Still, he would take no 
step of this kind without the divine direction. 
He inquired of the Lord, in the appointed way, 
saying; ** Shall I go up into any of the cities of 
JudahV 

^^And the Lord said unto him. Go up. And 
David said. Whither shall I go up 1 And he said, 
Unto Hehron." 

David made immediate preparations for the 
journey; and, with his wives, his men and their 
families, and their flocks, herds, and other pos- 
sessions, he arrived, after a few day's march, at 
Hehron. There he took up his residence ; while 
his followers dwelt in the adjacent towns and 
villages of which Hebron was considered the 
head. It was a delightful and fruitful country in 
the midst of the tribe of Judah. Its mountains 
were famed for fruits, herbage, and honey^ and 
many parts of it for olives, vineyards, grain, 
and pasture. 

Hebron, originally called Kirjath-arba, stood 
on an eminence, about twenty-seven miles south 
of Jerusalem. It was one of the most ancient 
cities of Canaan, being built seven years before 



DAVID. 141 

Tanis, the capital of lower Egypt. The Anakim, 
or giants, dwelt there, whom Caleb, assisted by 
the tribe of Judah, destroyed when he took the 
city. It was assigned to him and his descendants, 
with its dependencies, for their inheritance. Near 
this place, in the cave of Machpelah, were de- 
posited the remains of Abraham, of Isaac, and 
of Jacob, of Sarah, Rebekah, and Leah ; and, to 
add to its importance, it was one of the cities of 
refuge. 

Hebron, therefore, and its neighborhood, seem 
to have been peculiarly fitted for the reception 
of David and his followers. He came back to 
his own tribe, where he might expect to find 
warm and devoted friends, and to a commanding 
position, which would enable him to act with 
that wisdom and energy which his peculiar cir- 
cumstances required. The fertility of the coun- 
try, also, and its abundant supplies, were essen 
tial to his success ; for otherwise he would not 
have been able to make provision for the vast 
numbers who resorted continually to him. 

Thus, step by step, was the providence of God 
leading the son of Jesse forward to the exalted 
station which he was destined to fill. 



H8 P4VIP. 

CHAPTER XX. 



David is anointed king over Judah. Abner anoints Ish- 
bosheth king over Israel Asahel is killed by Abner. 

David's reception at Hebi:on was soon known 
throughout the whole tribe of which it was the 
metropolis, and excited a deep and general in- 
terest in his favor. In addition to this, there 
were many weighty reasons why the men of Ju- 
dah should desire, to see him the sucQessor of 
Saul, He was one of their own family. The pa- 
triarch Jacob had long ago foretold the establish- 
ment of the sovereignty in their trihe. David be- 
longed to it. He had, already, been chosen of 
God, and anointed by the prophet Samuel, to 
sway the sceptre. And, now, as it seemed to 
them, by the death of Saul the crisis had come, 
and Providence was clearly pointing out the way 
for the consummation of their wishes. They re- 
sorted, therefore, from all parts of the tribe to 
Hebron, and anointed David king over the house 
of Judah. He was now about thirty years of age j 
he had been ripening fast in the school of expe- 
rience 5 had much practical wisdom and energy 
of character ; and, above all, felt his dependence 
on God, and looked to him for guidance and 
support. 



PAVID. H3 

Immediately after his accession to the throne, 
David was told what the men of Jabesh-Gilead 
had done in rescuing the bodies of Saul and of 
his sons, and in affoTding them the last sad offices 
of respect. His regard for the late sovereign, 
(for David's magnanimity and sense of duty were 
too strong to permit him to indulge any other 
feelings than those of loyalty towards Saul,) and 
his devoted attachment to Jonathan, led him to 
view so heroic a deed of gratitude with deep 
emotion. His was a soul to appreciate it ; and 
one of the first acts of his reign, was to send a 
message to Jabesh-Gilead, to let those brave 
men know the sentiments which he cherished in 
view of their conduct. He invoked the blessing 
of the Lord upon them ; adding, " And now the 
Lord show kindness and truth unto you : and I 
also will requite you this kindness, because ye 
have done this thing. Therefore now let your 
hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for 
your master Saul is dead, and also the house of 
Judah have anointed me king over them." They 
could no longer look to Saul for that protection 
^hich David now ofiered them, and which, in his 
new and elevated station, he was ready to afford 
He urged them, therefore, not to yield to fear, 
but still to exhibit their accustomed courage in 
defending themselves against their enemies. 

In the meanwhile, another king appeared in 
Israel. , It was Ish-bosheth, a son of Saul ^ about 



i4>4> DAVID. 

forty years of age, and who, as we have reason 
to believe, would never have dared to aspire to 
such an eminence if he had not been brought 
forward and sustained by Abner, who had been 
the principal commander of Saul's forces, and 
was his near kinsman. 

Abner could not brook the thought of David's 
being king. His self-interest ; his ambition ; and 
probably hrs resentment, too, against one who 
had so often proved his superior in military skill 
to his great mortification and disgrace, induced 
him to take the course which he did. Soon ^fter 
the death of Saul he escorted Ish-bosheth to Ma- 
hanaim, a city of the Levites, in the tribe of 
Gad, on the east side of the Jordan, and there 
made him king with the usual ceremonies. Whe- 
ther Abner had previously obtained the consent 
of any of the tribes to this step, or whether he 
relied on the support of those over whom he 
thought he had the most influence, does not ap- 
pear. It is probable, that for one or the other of 
these reasons he made Ish-bosheth king, as we 
are told, over Gilead, or the whole country east 
of the Jordan, between that river and Arabia, an4 
over the Ashurites, men of the tribe of Asher, 
and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over 
Benjamin, and, to be sure of having the regal 
title broad enough, over all Israel. It would seem, 
too, that as Abner's influence extended, all the 
tribes, excepting that of Judah, acknowledged 



DAVID. . 14-5 

the validity of this title, and received Ish-bosheth 
as their sovereign. 

Mahanaim was doubtless chosen by Abner as 
the place best adapted, at first, for the centre of 
his enterprise, because it was in a secure part of 
the country 5 most of the larger cities on the 
other side of the Jordan being in the hands of the 
Philistines, or exposed to their attacks. Here 
Ish-bosheth resided some time, during which 
himself and David had no open collision with 
each other. 

We next hear of Abner and his forces, at Gi- 
beon, one of the principal cities in the tribe of 
Benjamin. This movement was probably intended 
to enlist the feelings of that tribe and of the ad- 
joining ones more strongly in behalf of Ish-bo- 
sheth, and to enable him, advancing farther south, 
to dethrone David, and bring the tribe of Judah 
into subjection. For, after a lapse of two years, 
during which there had been no open warfare be- 
tween the two monarch s, such a state of things 
now existed. 

A regard to his own safety led David to order 
Joab, the commander of his troops, to approach 
Gibeon, with a considerable force, in order to 
watch the motions of Abner, and to take such 
steps as the exigency might demand. Joab was at- 
tended by his brothers, Abishai and Asahel ; the 
three being the sons of Zeruiaji, David's sister. 

The hostile armies met at the pool of Gibeon j 

DaTid. 10 



146 DILYW. 

Joab and his men being on one side of it, and 
Abner and his on the other. It was not long be- 
fore the latter proposed to Joab, probably by a 
messenger sent for the purpose, that some pf the 
young men, from each side, should engage in 
plat/y as he termed it — a military contest with 
each other, — in view of the generals and the 
armies. 

The proposal was accepted ; and twelve of the 
Benjamites advancing, w«re met by an equal 
number of the other party. Both sides seem to 
have been at once inflamed with the most furious 
hostility. They rushed eagerly to the combat, 
each one seizing his antagonist by the hair, and 
thrusting their swords into each other, they all 
fell down dead together. This was but the sig- 
nal for a general and severe engagement, in 
which Abner and his men were defeated, and fled 
before the men of Judah. Asahel, the brother of 
Joab, and one of David's most valiant generals, 
was among the foremost in the pursuit ; beipg 
very swift in running, and " as light of foot as a 
wild roe*" He was pressing hard after Abner, 
intending, it would seem, to carry off his armor, 
after having slain him, as a rich trophy from the 
field of battle. 

Abner, looking behind him, inquired if it was 
Asahel. Being answered in the affirmative, he 
urged Asahel to turn aside from the pursuit, and 
be satisfied with the armor of some one of the 



DAVID. 14>7 

young men whom he might overtake in their 
flight. But the admonition was disregarded. It 
was repeated in stronger terms. " Turn thee 
aside from following me," exclaimed Ahner, 
** wherefore should i smite thee to the ground 1 
how then should I hold up my face to Joah thy 
brother 1" 

But Asahel, heedless of the warning, still press- 
ed on, and Abner, turning round, thrust him 
through with a spear, and he died on the spot. 
Abner continued his flight, Joab, and his brother 
Abishai, being now in pursuit of him, till thfe set- 
ting of the sun, when they came to the hill of 
Ammah, which was before Giah by the way of 
the wilderness of Gibeon. There the men of Ben- 
jamin, in one compact band, gathered round Ab- 
ner their general, and they all stood on the top 
of a hill, while Joab and .his party halted at a 
little distance from them. Abner's voice was 
soon heard, proposing a truce. He called aloud 
to Joab ; " Shall the sword devour for ever 1 
knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in 
the latter endl how long shall it be then, ere 
thou bid the people return from following their 
brethren 1" 

"As God liveth," replied Joab, " unless thou 
had St spoken, surely then in the morning the 
people had gone up every one from following his 
brother 5" — intending to charge Abner with be- 
ing the cause of the bloody conflict that had taken 



148 DAVID. 

place, by the challenge which he gave in the 
morning near the pool of Gibeon. Still Joab was 
ready to accede to the proposal of liaving hos- 
tilities cease, and gave the well-known signal for 
this, by blowing a trumpet. Abner immediately 
withdrew with his remaining forces, and march- 
ing all night, after having passed the Jordan, ar- 
rived at Mahanaim. Jdab, too, returned with his 
men to Hebron, reaching that place at break of 
day. The loss on the side of Abner, amounted to 
three hundred and sixty, while only twenty of 
the men of Judah were slain, including Asahel. 
The body of the latter being found, was carried 
to Bethlehem, and buried there in the sepulchre 
of his father. 

Military men, even renowned heroes, have of- 
ten been among the first to deprecate the evils 
of war. They know its horrors and bitter suffer- 
ings, and, doubtless, have to endure many a pang 
of remorse for being the authors of them. Hence 
the exclamation of Abner, " Shall the sword c?e- 
pour for ever ? knowest thou not that it will be 
bitterness in the latter end ?" 

And shall the sword devour for everl We 
hope not. A happy time, (it may not be far dis- 
tant,) is foretold by the voice of inspiration, when 
men " shall beat their swords into plough-shares, 
and their spears into pruning-hooks : nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall 
they learn war any more." But this must be 



DAVID. 14>9 

brought about under the blessing of God, by the 
prayers and efforts of the followers of Christ. 
The spirit of the Gospel will alone produce it ; 
and this spirit must breathe out, and speak, and 
act in the tempers, the conversation, and conduct 
of christians. They are the light of thie world. 
They are the salt of the earth. They are the 
leaven that must work in and through the whole 
mass until it is leavened. 

My young friend, are you meek, forgiving, gen- 
tle, and peaceable 1 Or, does the spirit of pride, 
of resentment, of animosity towards any, reign 
within your breast 1 Search and see. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Abner offers his services to David, and makes a league 
with him. Joab slays Abner. « • 

For about five years after the battle of Gibeon 
there W&s a continued state of warfare between 
the house of Saul and the house of David ; un- 
doubtedly some battles and skirmishes taking 
place, though no particular account of them is 
given. During this period David was increas- 
ing in power and influence, and gaining an 



150 DAVID. 

ascendency over his competitor. He remained 
still at Hebron, and six sons were born to him 
by as many wives, during his residence in that 
city. Amnon^ his first-born, was the son of 
Ahinoam; Chileah^ the son of Abigail; Absa- 
lom^ of Maacah, the daughter of Ta.mai king 
of Geshur 5 Adonijah^ of Haggith 5 Shephaiiahj 
of Abital 5 and lihream, of Eglah. It is thought 
that he married Maacah in order to form a 
friendly alliance with her father, whose territory 
was contiguous to the half tribe of Manasseh 
beyond the Jordan. David hoped, in this way, 
to strengthen himself the more against Ish-bo- 
sheth, who had great influence in that region. 

In the meanwhile Abner was busily employed 
in doing every thing he could to increase his 
power 5 apparently, to promote the interests of 
his sovereign, but really, it would seem, to pre- 
pare the way for his own higher advancement. 
For there is reason to believe that the throne 
had now become the object of his ambition. He 
had taken to himself, and treated as his wife, a 
* woman whose name was Rizpah, and who had 
been a concubine of Saul. To do this was un- 
derstood, in those times, as at least indicating 
an attempt upon the crown, and, sometimes, as 
asserting a claim to it. 

Ish-bosheth complaining of this procedure on 
the part of Abner, the latter became greatly en- 
raged, and did not hesitate to address the king 



DAVID. 151 

m the most, violent language. " Am I a dog's 
head," he exclaimed, ** which against Judah do 
show kindness this day unto the house of Saul 
thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, 
and have not delivered thee into the hand of 
David, that thou chargest me to-day with a fault 
concerning this woman 1" He then proceeded 
to let Ish-bosheth know that he would have his 
Tevenge, and an ample one too, for the indignity 
which had been offered him. Imprecating the 
curse of God upon himself, if he did not fulfil 
hk purpose, he declared that as the Lord had 
sworn to David, even so would he act in be- 
half of the right of the latter, " to translate the 
kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up 
the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, 
from Dan even to Beer-sheba." 

Ish-bosheth was struck with terror at the 
threat, and standing in great awe of one who 
he knew had raised him to the throne, and sua 
tained him in power, he dared not make any re- 
ply. He hopeil, however, to devise some mode 
by which the offended Abner might be pacified^ 
and diverted from his design. But it was too 
late. The latter, to gratify his revenge, or to 
take what he deemed a politic course, (thinking, 
perhaps, that his rupture with Ishbosheth would 
make it very difficult to push his ambitious 
plans,) or, from these motives combined, sent a 
message to David of the most friendly kind. He 



152 DAVID. 

insinuated that he himself was really the one in 
authority over the tribes which were subject to 
Ish-bosheth, and said that if the king of Judah 
would enter into a league with him, his power 
should be exercised to bring the whole land of 
Israel under the dominion of Dayid. 

The latter, in reply, engaged to enter into 
such a league ; but on one condition, that Abner 
should not visit him for this purpose, unless he 
restored to David his wife Michal, the daughter 
of Saul, whom he obtained by his perilous tri- 
umph over the Philistines. He had never been 
divorced from her, or repudiated her. She had 
been forcibly and unjustly taken from him, and 
he had a right to her as his lawful wife. At the 
same time, David sent messengers to Ish-bo- 
sheth, to make a formal demand of Michal. This 
may have been done to screen Abner, and to 
make it easier for him to carry into effect his 
design of espousing the cause of David. At any 
rate, what with his fears of refusing, and the 
additional threats of Abner if^he failed to 
comply, Ish-bosheth sent immediately and took 
Michal from her husband, who, it seems, had 
a strong aflTection for her. He accompanied her 
weeping, a considerable distance, as far as Ba- 
hurjm, a town in the tribe of Benjamin, where 
Abner, who took her in charge, ordered him to 
return home to Gallim. 

What a BiTiking proof do we find, in this part 



1 



DAVID. 153 

of our history, of the evils of polygamy and of 
the vastly superior advantages and blessings of 
the domestic state as it now exists under the 
Gospel dispensation. Let us be truly grateful 
for our happier lot in this respect, and do all 
we can, the grace of God assisting us, to render 
our families the scenes of mutual christian afiec* 
tion among their members, the nurseries of the 
devoted followers of the Savior, and of faithful 
laborers in his vineyard. 

Abner now began to push his plans of sup- 
porting David with new vigor. He conferred 
with many of the elders of Israel, men in . au- 
thority, and whose power and influence were 
great, and made known his views to them, urg- 
ing their co-operation. " Ye sought for David," 
said he, ** in times past to be king over you : 
Now then do it : for the Lord hath spoken of 
David, saying, By the hand of my servant David 
I will save my people Israel out of the hand of 
the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their 
enemies." He addressed the same language to 
the leading nden of the tribe of Benjamin, among 
whom Ish-bosheth had some of his most devoted 
adherents ; and when he thought he had secured 
a party strong enough to justify an open revolt, 
he hastened to Hebron. Twenty of his follow- 
ers accompanied him, as an escort to Michal, 
whom he restored in safety tp David. This, 
with the new prospects which were, now open- 



154« DAVID. 

ing before him of swaying a rightful sceptre 
over all Israel, was the cause of great joy to 
David and his people. He immediately made a 
feast for Abner and his men, as a mark of friend- 
ship and of public respect, entertaining them 
bountifully, and with that gladsome festivity 
which became the occasion. 

Abner was gratified with this cordial recep- 
tion, and, on taking his leave, renewed his assur- 
ances of attachment to David. ** I will arise and 
go," said he, " and will gather all' Israel unto my 
lord the king, that they may make a league with 
thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine 
heart desireth." David bade him depart in peace, 
little thinking how soon his bright visions of 
ambition would be shrouded in utter darkness. 

Joab, David's general, who had been abroad 
on some military excursion, now returned with 
his troops to Hebron. He was immediately in- 
formed of what had taken place, and especially 
of the manner in which Abner had been re- 
ceived and treated by the king.* He could. not 
restrain his indignation. Should Abner remain 
true to his promises, he saw in him a powerful 
and dangerous rival, who might soon supplant 
him in the affections of David. But he might 
prove a traitor, (and he would fain regard him 
as such,) coming insidiously to spy out their 
condition, and to return to'Ish-bosheth with new 
aadd more successful plans of carrying on the 



DAVID. 155 

war against the house of Judah. Pride, jealousy, 
and a deep feeling of revenge against the indi- 
vidual who had killed his brother Asahel, rankled 
in the breast of Joab. He could not endure it, 
that one whom he so much both dreaded and 
hated should have already thus ingratiated him 
self into the good opinion of the king, and re 
ceived from him such distinguished marks of 
attention. He sought an interview with David^ 
and, artfully addressing his fears, expostulated 
with him on thp folly of placing any confidence 
in Abner. 

"What hast thou donel" said he, "behold, 
Abner came unto thee 5 why is it that thou hast 
sent him away, and he is quite gonel Thou 
knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to 
deceive thee,' and to know thy going out and 
thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest." 

We are not told that David made any reply. 
Perhaps, seeing as he did the deep and resentful 
feelings of Joab, he thought it the wisest course 
to be silent and watch the progress of events. 
He, too, had no forebodings of the fate that 
awaited one from whom he was now expecting 
such efficient aid as would soon place him on 
the throne of the whole united kingdom. 

By this time Abner had advanced but a short 
distance on his way home, when he was over- 
taken by some messengers whom Joab sent 
dfter him, and who invited him to return. It 



156 DAVID. 

is not improbable that they did this in the name 
of the king, although David knetv nothing of the 
matter. Be this as it may, the request was made 
in so earnest a manner, and such important rea- 
sons assigned for his complying with it, that 
Abner came back immediately to Hebron. He 
was met, at the gate of the city, by Joab and 
his brother Abishai; while the former taking 
him aside, as if to speak with him in a peace- 
able and friendly manner, despatched him on 
the spot. It was a daring deed, preconcerted 
by the two, and executed by the hand of one of 
them, in the spirit of deep revenge for the death 
of their brother Asahel. We have reason to 
think, also, that jealousy of Abner was a kin- 
dred passion in the breast of Joab, which had 
its full share in bringing about this bloody ca- 
tastrophe. 

Such is man, when swayed by his selfish, vin- 
dictive, and ambitious feelings* Let them gain 
the ascendency over him, and he sets at defiance 
the laws both of God and his fellow-men. He 
rushes on to the commission of the most atro- 
cious crimes. He hesitates not, with deceit and 
treachery, and in cold blood, to take the life of 
one whom, as his enemy or his rival, he wishes 
to put out of the way. What an evil sin must 
be, when, in its very nature, it leads to such 
terrible results! 



DAVID^. , 157 

CHAPTER XXII. 



David orders a general moumiDg for Abner. He causes 
the murderers of Ish-bosheth to be put to death. 

The news of Abner's death, spreading through 
the city, soon reached the ears of Davids It was 
an unexpected blow to him. He was surprised 
and shocked at it. He abhorred the cruel and 
wicked deed which Joab had perpetrated. He 
would not endure, for a moment, to labor under 
the most remote suspicion of having ordered it, 
or of having even connived at it. In a burst of 
impassioned feeling, followed by a prophetic de- 
nunciation, he exclaimed 5 " I and my kingdom 
are guiltless before the Lord for ever from the 
blood of Abner the son of Ner : Let it rest on 
the head of Joab, and on all his father's house ; 
and let there not fail from the house of Joab one 
that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that lean- 
eth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or 
that lacketh bread." 

But the king did not stop here. He gave a 
more public demonstration of his grief, and of his 
detestation of the deed which was the cause of 
it. In doing this, he imposed a duty upon Joab 
that wa3 adapted to overwhelm him with shame 
and mortification. He ordered him particularly, 
and, at the same time, the whole body of the 



153 DATID. 

people, to rend their garments, to put on sack- 
cloth, and to mourn for Abner, with the usual 
ceremonies, at the funeral which was soon to 
take place. And as they carried him to the 
grave, we are told that *' king David himself fol- 
lowed the bier. And they buried Abner in He- 
bron : and the king lifted up his voice, and wept 
at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept." 
David composed, too, a short pathetic lamen- 
tation, which was recited, or sung, at the fune- 
ral I at the hearing of which the assembled mul- 
titude wept again over Abner. 

" Died Abner as a fool dieth 1 

Thy hands were not l>ound, 

Nor thy feet put into fetters : 

As a man falleth before wicked men, 

So fallest thou." 

The sentiments of which seem to be, that Abner 
did not die the foolish and shameful death of a 
villain who is taken and bound, and cut off by 
the sword of justice ; but that he fell in an un- 
timely and cruel manner, as those do who fall 
by the treachery of the assassin, or the stroke 
of the murderer. 

This, let it be observed, must have been re- 
garded by all who heard it as a most severe re- 
proof, on the part of the king, of Joab and Abi- 
shai, and which they had to endure thus publicly, 
in the presence of all the people. It shows, also, 



DAVID. 159 

that it was nothing but David's fears, as we shall 
soon see, of not being able to carry such a pur- 
pose into effect, which prevented him from bring- 
ing these two murderers to justice, and inflict- 
ing upon them the punishment which their crime 
deserved. 

After the burial of Abner, the people, as was 
the custom, came with refreshments to the house 
of David, who was the principal mourner, to in- 
duce him to partake of them, and not to prolong 
the fast any further which he had been observ- 
ing. But he felt a sincere and deep grief on the 
occasion, and protested, with a solemn appeal to 
God, that he would taste of nothing till the sun 
went down. This additional proof of his sorrow 
for the death of Abner, and of his having had no 
participation in the guilt of those who caused 
it, w^as noticed by tho people, and it pleased 
them much; as did, indeed, the whole course 
of his conduct. " All the people," we are told, 
" and all Israel understood that day it was not 
of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner. " 

David felt it due to himself, also, to let his 
principal attendants, and through them the com^ 
munity at large, know the reason why he did 
not take the proper steps to make Joab and his 
brother suffer the penalty of their guilt. " Know 
ye not," said he, " that there is a prince and a 
great man fallen this day in Israel ] And I am 
this day weak, though anointed king ; and these 



160 DAVID. 

men, the sons of Zeruiah, be too hard for me : 
The Lord shall reward the doer of evil accord- 
ing to his wickedness.*' He feared that he had 
not sufficient authority to seize and bring them 
to a condign punishment. They had great in- 
fluence, especially Joab, with the soldiery as a 
distinguished military commander, and might 
prove too strong a match for him in the yet un- 
settled state of his affairs. Still, this does not 
seem to furnish a sufficient justification for the 
course which David pursued. One who occupied 
the high official station which he did, and who 
was placed in it by Jehovaji himself, ought sure- 
ly to have gone forward in the discharge of his 
duty, and endeavored to bring the offenders to 
justice, with a firm reliance on the Almighty 
arm, let the immediate consequences be what 
they might. When we have truth and right on 
our side, we should not fear what man can do to 
us. He who has all things under his control 
will provide for the emergency, and bring good 
out of evil. 

Ish-bosheth was now drawing near the close 
both of his reign and his life. He was greatly 
dismayed, as well as his people, at the death of 
Abner. He felt that his authority could hardly 
be sustained, after the loss of one on whom he so 
entirely relied for support, and looked forward 
with an appalling despondency to his future pros- 
pects Pe had retired one day, at noon, and lay 



DAV4D. 16 1 

on his bied seeking repose, when his apartment 
was entered by two brothers, Baanah and Re- 
chab, captains in his army. Having formed a 
design to take the life of the king, they gained 
an easy access to the room where he was sleep- 
ing, by pretending that they wifehed to get some 
grain from that part of the house. It is probable 
th^t the king*s stbres were there, and that they 
bad been accustomed to go to them, to procure 
supplies for themselves and their men. They kill- 
ed I«h«bosheth "immediately, and escaping^ with 
his heiad, which they severed from the body, fled 
during the night to Hebron, without being over- 
taken. Whether they acted in the afiair fi*om 
any malice which they harbored towards Ish- 
bosheth; or from a desire to bring the whole 
country, as speedily ad possible, under the do- 
minion of David ; or merely to ingratiate them- 
selves with the latter and receive a large reward 
for thus removing his rival out of the way, we 
are not told.^ They exulted, however, greatly in 
their success, and on their arrival at Hebron, 
being introduced into the presence of the king, 
they made known what they supposed would be 
theii* very acceptable errand. "Behold," they 
said, " the head of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul 
thine enemy, which sought thy life ; and the 
Lord hath avenged my lord the king this day 
of Saul, and of his seed." 
But David beheld the horrid sight with far- 

Darid. 1 i 



162 P4VfP. 

different feelings from those of satisfaation, and 
indignantly replied ; ** As the Lord liveth, who 
hath redeemed my 80«1 out of all adversity, 
when one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, 
thinking to have brought good tidings, I took 
hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought 
that I would have given him a reward for his 
tidings: how much more when wicked men 
have slain a righteous person in his own house 
upon his bed. Shall I not therefore now require 
his blood of your hand, and take you away from 
the earth 1" 

There was no delay in carrying the sentenee 
into effect. David ordered them to be put to 
death, which was immediately done i and their 
hands and their feet, being cut off, were hung i|p 
over the pool in Hebron, as a testimony of his s^b* 
borrence of the treacherous murder, and a signal 
proof that the offenders had been brought to 
justice. The head of Ish-bosheth was decently 
buried in the tomb of Abner ; David thus show- 
ing the only mark of respect that it was in his 
power to offer to the remains of his late rival. 

It may be proper fo add, that David speaks of 
Ish-bosheth as a righteous person, probably with 
reference to his murderers, whom he had always 
treated in a just and proper manner, and who had 
no reasonable ground of complaint against him 
so far as they were themselves concerned. But 
with regard to his right to the throng, as the 



OAvu), 16$ 

successor of Saul, Ish-bosheth was far from 
being a righteous person. He was nothing less 
than an usurper* For he must unquestionably 
have known, that one was living who had a 
claim prior to his. This was Mephibosheth, a 
son of Jonathan his elder brother, who was five 
years old when Saul died. It seems that the 
nurs^ of this child was so terrified at the news 
of the defeat of the Israelites, and of the death 
of S|iul and Jonathan, that she took him up in 
hejr arms to fiee to some place of safety, but 
falling down with him, in her haste, he was so 
much injured that he was effected with perma- 
qent lameness. This, together with his extreme 
youth, and perhaps general debility, seems to 
have kept him in obscurity ; no one venturing 
to assert his right to the throne, or to take any 
steps to place him on it. Some are of the opinion 
that the slight, passing notice of Mephibosheth 
in the sacred narrative, is inserted to show the 
encouragement which Sechab and Baanah might 
have had to take the life of Ish*bosbeth; as they 
would have nothing to fear from one who could 
not, on account of his youth and infirmity, pur- 
sue them as the avenger of blood. 



164 DAVID. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 



David is anoioted king over all Israel. He takes the strong 
hold of Zion from the Jebusites. He defeats the Philis- 
tines. 

Immediately on the death of Ish-bosheth, a 
general movement in favor of David took place 
in the various tribes. Their chief men of all class- 
es ; three thousand and seven hundred of the de- 
scendants of Aaron, with four thousand and six 
hundred Levites ; and an immense number of 
armed soldiers, under valiant and renowned lead- 
ers, were seen, in difierent companies and direc- 
tions, on their march towards Hebron. When 
assembled there, the whole multitude amounted 
to more than three hundred and fifty thousand. 
They came with one united feeling of loyalty, 
to make David their king. The elders, or prin- 
cipal men, soon waited 6n him, to let him know 
the wishes of the people. In doing this, they 
thus accosted him ; " Behold, we are thy bone 
and thy flesh. Also in time past, when Saul 
was king over us, thou wast he th^t leddest out 
and broughtest in Israel : and the Lord said to 
thee. Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou 
shalt be a captain over Israel." 

David^s course of duty was plain. He had 
already been chosen of God, and anointed by 



DAVID. 169 

Samuel, to fill the elevated station to which he 
was now called hy the whole body of his coan- 
trymen. He, therefore, proceeded to take the 
necessary steps which anf occasion of such im- 
portance demanded. He entered into a solemn 
covenant with the elders of Israel, as the repre- 
sentatives of the people, accompanied by appro- 
priate religious ceremonies ; while both parties 
appealed to God to witness the sincerity of their 
mutual professions. In this he bound himself to 
a faithful performance of his duty as the sove- 
reign of the nation, in accordance with the laws 
and directions of Jehovah ; and the elders, in be^ 
half of themselves and the people, stipulated that, 
in the same way, all should render him the sub- 
mission and obedience to which he was entitled. 
He was then anointed and crowned, in the usual 
manner, king of Israel. 

It must have been a sublime spectacle to see 
this rightful monarch, once an obscure shepherd- 
boy, now seated on the throne of a numerous 
and powerfid people, in the midst of admiring 
thousands, most of them men of tried valor, and 
equipped for military service, with their brave 
and experienced commanders ; and all acknow- 
ledging a cheerful allegiance, and glowing with 
one common feeling of affectionate and devoted 
attachment. The designs of Providence, in this 
respect, were at length consummated > while 
David was the better prepared to discharge ttie 



166 DAVID. 

arduous duties that would derolve upon him^ by 
the very trials, severe and prolonged as they had 
been, through which he had passed. He was now 
thirty-seven years and sist months old, having 
reigned as king of Judah seven years and a half. 

A season of gladness and festivity followed 
David made a great feast, which lasted ihree 
days, and which he honored with his presence. 
It would have been impossible to have lun^shed 
a suitable entertainment for so vast an assembly, 
if previous preparations had not been made by 
Judah, and the contiguous tribes* We are told 
that " they that were nigh them, even unto Issa* 
char and Zebulun and Napthali, brought bread 
on adses, and on camels, and on mules, and on 
oxen ; and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches 
of raisms, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep 
abundantly; for there was joy in Israel." 

Such a military force as was now collected, 
furnished David with a most favorable opportu- 
nity of engaging in an enterprise which required 
courage, skill, and numbers. It was nothing less 
than to take the strong hold of Zion from the 
Jeb'usites, who were in possession of it. It was 
about twenty-seven miles north 6f Hebron. The 
city, in the south-western part of which the for- 
tress was built, had originally beeiTcalled Salem, 
and now bore the name of Jehus. Its situation 
for strength, and other local advantages, was 
such as to render it very desirable that David 



DAVID. 167 

ihduld fit his rebidi^ncd thdr«, and make it the 
metropolis of his kingdom^ To rescue this place 
firom the hands of the enemy, and gain perma- 
nent possession of it, would signalize the com* 
Qiencement o( his reign in the most auspicious 
manner. 

We cannot hut suppose, though it is not men- 
tioned in the sacred narrative, that David sought 
counsel of the Lord before embarking in this en- 
terprise, and that he was directed to proceed. 
How many men he took with him we are not 
told, but doubtless a very considerable force, and 
Such as he considered abundantly adequate. It 
may be that all the soldiery assembled at his coro- 
nation accompanied him. He went in person at 
the head of the army. 

The Jebusites felt very secure in their strong 
hold, and appear not to have been at all intimi- 
dated by the approach of David and the numbers 
that were with him. They defied him in the most 
taunting manner, placing blind and lame persons 
on the walls, as if to defend the place, and call- 
ing out to David) telling him that until he could 
overpower this feeble band, he could never entcir 
the city. 

David was justly provoked at the insult, and 
especially at the jeers of the blind and the lame, 
who probably mocked him and his men, and dcr 
elared that he should never gain an entrance. 
He caused a proclamation to be made to this ef- 



168 DAVID. 

feet ; ** Whosoever gettfeth up to the gutter, and 
smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, 
that are hated of David's soul, he shall be chief 
and captain." He caUs them hattdy for they were 
idolaters, and opposers of the true Qod. 

Joab led the way, at the head of a party of 
brave men, and succeeding in effecting an en 
trance, the city was soon taken, and in possessipn 
of the Israelites. The inhabitants, however, it 
would seem were spared, and continued to dwell 
in the neighborhood. • 

David fixed his residence in the fortress, and 
enlarged and strengthened the city greatly, which 
was now called the city of Davids It also bore the 
name of Jerusalem^ which it retains to this day. 

The fame of David began to extend to a dis- 
tance. It reached the ears of Hiram, king of Tyre, 
who thought it for his interest to seek an alli- 
ance with this powerful and enterprising mon- 
arch. He sent an embassy to David, accompa- 
nied with an abundant supply of cedar trees^ 
with carpenters and masons, for the erection of 
a magnificent hbuse as th6 future dwelling of the 
king of Israel. This, together with the reply, 
and not improbably the presents which were sent 
in return, seems to have laid the foundation of 
the friendly intercourse which long after sub- 
sisted between Hiram, and David and his son 
Solomon. In this, and various other ways, *^ Dal44 
perceived that the Lord had established him king 



DAVID. 169 

over Israel, and that He had ex^alted his kingdom 
for his people Israel's sake." 

David's family, too, was still increasing. After 
getting settled at Jerusalem, he added to his 
number of wived and concubines, and had, in al], 
thirteen sons born to him in that city. 

About this time, the Philistines, having heard 
that David had united all the tribes in his favor, 
and become king of the whole nation, began to 
dread this increase of the strength of the Israel- 
ites. They thought it expedient to commence an 
attack upon the new monarch before he should 
become still more powerful, and collect his forces 
to expel them from the land. Assembling in Iftrge 
numbers, their troops spread themselves in the 
valley of Rephaim,'not far from Jerusalem. 

David, in the meanwhile, having received in- 
telligence of these movements, withdrew with 
his men, before the arrival of the Philistines, into 
a strong hold some little distance from the city, 
to deliberate upon such measures as might seem 
to be expedient, and especially to be the more 
secure against an assault. Here he inquired of 
the Lord, whether he should go forward and at- 
tack the Philistines, and if he did, whether they 
would be delivered into his hand. The reply was; 
" Go up : for Twill doubtless deliver the Philis- 
tines into thine hand." He did so, and gained a 
complete victory over them. The survivors fled, 



170 DAVID. 

leaving theit idols behind them, Which thfi Israel*- 
ites consumed with fire. 

It was not long before the enemf^ With a tiew 
reinforcement, appeared in the same place. On 
David's again inquiring whether he should go 
out and attack them, he was directed not yet to 
do it, but to fetch a compass behind them, and 
to come upon them over against some mulberry 
trees. There he was to remain quiet, with his 
men, till he heard the sound of a going in the 
tops of the trees, when he was to rush forward^ 
assured of success. He followed the direction, 
and defeated th6 Philistines, pursuing them, 
with great slaughter^ for a oonsidetable dis* 
tance* This providential, and probably miracu* 
lous interposition in his favor, was well adapted 
to teatsh hhn his dependence on Ood, and to in- 
spire him with increased confidence in the di* 
vine protetjtion. His fame, we are told, was now 
widely extended, "and the Lord brought the 
fear of him upon all nations." 

We, too, should inquire of the Lord^ continu* 
ally, 'what our course of duty isi We can do 
this in humble and earnest prftyet* We can 
beseech him to give us his Holy Spifit, to en« 
lighten us into the knowledge of divine truth, 
and to sanctify the affections of our souls ; to 
bring us under the infiuence of love to God, and 
to our fellow-men i to purify and elevate our 
motives of conduct, and plans of action ^ and to 



DAVID* 171 

lead us to live for the advancement of the Re- 
deemer's kingdom. We can implore the in- 
fluences of the same Spirit, to open the eyes of 
our understandings, so that the revealed Word 
may be a lamp unto out feet, and a light vnio 
ottr path, and that the language of God'tf provi- 
dential dealings with us may be more and more 
intelligible. We can ask, even, for special direc- 
tion in particular ^ases. Not that we can resort 
to any high-priest, as of old, with the Urim and 
Thummim, and receive the divine response; 
nor that we can hope for a miraculous agency in 
our behalf. But having otir hearts right with 
Gody and our principles and motives what they 
should be \ acting under the guidance of the 
general truths and precepts of the sacred Scrip- 
tures ; watching the indications of providence ; 
taking counsel of the experienced, wise, and de- 
voted disciples of Christ; striving to keep a 
conscience void of oflence ; and then exercising 
our best judgment, we may expect and believe 
that we shall go right, that We shall act so as to 
promote the honor of God, and secure his favor 
and blessing. 

Do yott, my young friend, seek direction of 
the Lord, with this spirit, and in the use of 
these means'! Happy, indeed, are you, if you 
do ; for the meek will He guide in judgment^ and 
the meek will He teach his way* 



172 DAVID. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Daidd brings the ark to Jerusalem. 

David before this time, and probably soon 
after getting possession of mount Zion, had 
consulted with his principal men, and with the 
great body of the people around him, who were 
assembled for that purpose, respecting an ob- 
ject which lay very near his heart. ** If it seem 
good unto you,'' said he, ** and that it be of the 
Lord our God, let us send ahroad unto our 
brethren every where, that are left in all the 
land of Israel^ and with them also to the priests 
and Levites which are in their cities and sub- 
urbs, that they may gather themselves unto me : 
and let us bring again the ark of our God to us : 
for we inquired not at it in the days of Saul." 

This symbol of the divine presence, it will be 
recollected, was now at Kirjath-jearim, a city 
about nine miles from Jerusalem, in a north- 
western direction. It was placed there, at least 
seventy years before, after having been restored 
by the Philistines, in the house of Abinadab, and 
entrusted to his care. David well knew the im- 
portance of having it at Jerusalem, the seat of 
his government, that he mi^ht thus inspire both 
himself and his people with renewed confidence 



DAVID. 173 

m the divine guidance and protection. His pro- 
posal for its removal met with universal appro* 
bation $ but the incursions of the Philistines, and 
his battles with them, prevented him, at the 
time, from carrying his pious design into effect.' 

Now, feeling secure against any fresh attack, 
and having, as we have every reason to believe, 
obtained the divine direction so to do, David 
made the necessary preparations to bring up the 
ark to Jerusalem. He summoned together ** all 
the chosen men of Israel," — the chief priests, 
with the high-priest at their head, the princes, 
the rulers, and the leaders of the tribes, to go 
with him on this momentous errand. It was not 
long before they were all assembled, to the 
number of thirty thousand, and on their way, 
in solemn procession, to the place of their des- 
tination. 

Having arrived at Kirjath-jearim, they soon 
found the ark ; " the ark of God," as it is termed, 
** whose name is called by the name of the Lord 
of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims." 
They placed it on a new cart, and brought it out 
of the ' house of Abinadab which stood on an 
eminence^ his sons, Uzzdi and Abio driving 
the oxen. The occasion was one of great reli- 
gious joy, and as a manifestation of it, those 
who attended the ark on its way filled the air 
with their sacred songs and music. The king 
himself, we are told, ** and all the house of 



174 XJgiVIB. ' 

Israel played before ih^ Lord on all miganer of 
instruments made of fir wood, eyen on harps, 
and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cor- 
nets, and on cymbals." 

David is supposed, a( this time, to have com^ 
posed the sixty-eighth psalm, a most beautiful 
and sublime specimen, of Hebrew poetry, and 
which was probably recited, or sung, as the ark 
was moving from Kirjath-jearim. The reader 
would do well to pause in the narrative, and 
peruse iU 

When the procession had arrived at Nachon's 
threshing-floor, the oxen that drew the ark stum^ 
bled and shook it, which Uzzah perceiving took 
hold of it, to prevent its falling. This was a 
rash and unwarranted act. For even the Kohath^ 
ites, who were appointed from ampng the Leyitea 
to carry the ark, were permitted to do this, 
(after it had been covered by the priests,) only 
by ta,king hold of the staves ; and they were for- 
bidden so much as to touch it on pain of death. 
The pjenalty, therefore^ must be inflicted upon 
the present offender, who being himself a Levite 
was, undoubtedly, well acquainted with the di- 
vine injunction. " And the anger of the Lord," 
we .are told, ** was kindled against Uzzah ; and 
God smote him there for his error ; and there 
he died by the ark of God " 

This was a severe blow to David. He yielded 
to a sinful impetuosity of temper, and ** was dis« 



SAYID. 175 

pleased " at thii aet of divine justice, probably 
giving vent to his feelings in bohh) outward ex- 
pression of discontent, and ^ling the place by 
the name of Perez-uzzah, (or iht breach of Uzzah,) 
which it afterwards bore. He was struck, too, 
with consternation, not knowing, as it would 
seem, what course to take, and exclaimed, ** How 
shall the ark of the Lord come to me V He 
feared to attempt again, certainly at present, its 
removal to Jerusalem, and caused it to be placed 
in "the house of Obed-edom, the Gittite, which 
was close by. There it remained three months, 
being treated with the greatest care and rever- 
ence, and drawing down the choicest blessings 
upon Obed-edom, and his household, and all that 
pertained to him. 

David, being informed of this, and concluding 
that the divine indignation against the late ir- 
reverence shown towards the ark had passed 
by, determined once more to attempt its re- 
moval to Jerusalem. He had already prepared 
a suitable place and tabernacle for its reception, 
and was resolved to have every thing done, at 
this time, in strict conformity with the prescri- 
bed directions. Again the august assembly were 
convened for this purpose from all parts of the 
land, and the solemn injunction was laid by 
David upon the priests and Levites ; ** Sanctify 
yourselves, — that ye may bring up the ark of 
the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I 



176 DAVID 

have prepared- for it« For because ye did it not 
at the fiVst, the Lord our God made a breadi 
upon us, for that we sought him not after the 
due order." The chief of the Levites, too, 
were directed to appoint certain of their breth- 
ren to be singers of the sacred songs on the oc- 
casion, **with instruments of music, psalteries 
and harps and cymbdis, sounding, by lifting up 
the voice with joy."* 

Every thing being in readiness, Bavid and his 
people proceeded in due order to the house of 
Obed-edom. The elders of Israel, the captains 
over thousands, the priests, eight hundred and 
sixty-two Levites, and an immense multitude at- 
tended him* He had laid aside his royal dress, 
and was clad in a robe of fine linen, with a priest- 
ly ephod over it ; ^us showing that he went as 
one of the ministers of the ark, to serve with 
the other appropriate attendants in bearing it to 
the place of its destination. It was taken from 
the house of Obed-edom with the most scru- 
pulous care and solemnity; the Levites who 
were appointed to that office, bearing it on their 
shoulders by meaus of the staves which support* 
ed it. Having advanced a very short distance, 
David perceiving that every thing was going 
forward auspiciously, and that the Lord was 

• It is suDposed that David, about this time, composed the 
one hundred and tbirty<>second Psalm. 



DAYID. 177 

evidently adding his blessing to the work, caus- 
ed the ark and the procession to stop, while, at 
his command, a sacrifice of oxen and fallings 
were offered up. Again they'^ were in motion 
towards Jerusalem, and '' thus all Israel brought 
up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with 
shouting, and with sound of the comet, and 
with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a 
noise with psalteries and harps.'^ And so great 
was the joy of David on the occasion, that giving 
vent to his transport, while playing on some in- 
strument, he moved before the ark in a measur- 
ed and exulting step, dancing as it were, and 
probably keeping time with the sacred music. 
This kind of religious movement, or dancing, 
was not uncommon among the Jews. After the 
deliverance from the Egyptians, Miriam with her 
women praised God in dances as well as songs. 
It was practised, too, at the feasts, and in public 
triumphs. 

As they approached the tabernacle, it is sup- 
posed that the twenty-fourth Psalm was sung, 
the different bands of singers and musicians, 
at one time, conducting their appropriate parts 
separately; and all, at another, breaking forth 
in one getieral strain of exultation. 

Thus all exclaim, 

** Lift up your heads, O ye gates; 
And be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors j 
And the King of glory shall come in." 
David. 12 



178 DAVID. 

One band inquires, 

♦* Who is this King of glory T 

Another replies, 

<* The Lord, strong and mighty ; 
The Lord, mighty in battle." 

All again exclaim, 

** Lift up your heads, ye gates 5 
Even lift them up, ye everlasting doors ; 
And the King of glory shall ?ome in." 

Again the inquiry is inade, 

^' Who is this King 9f glory V^ 

And the reply is- heard, 

<< The Lord of hosts J 
He is the King of glory.*' 



CHAPTER XXV. 

David offers sacrifices and peaee-ofierings. He reproves 
Michal. Nathan informs him that not he, but Solomon, 
should build the temple. 

Having deposited the ark in its appropriate 
place, in the tahernacle which David had pre- 
pared for it, he offered hurnt sacrifices and peace- 
offerings before God. He then pronounced a so- 



DAVJD. 179 

lemii benediction upon the assembled multitude, 
and caused to be distributed among them^aboun- 
tiful supply of refreshments which were suited 
to the occasion. 

At this time, also, David appointed certain of 
the Levites to minister before the ark, and con- 
duct the religious worship of the tabernacle, of 
whom Asaph was chief. In the music and sa- 
cred songs, he played upon the cymbals, while 
others used psalteries, harps and trumpets. The 
Psalm recorded in the sixteenth chapter of the 
first book of Chronicles, composed by David, 
and delivered by him to Asaph and his brethren 
for this purpose, was sung by the full choir, and 
responded to by the whole assembly, bursting 
forth in one loud and joyful Jlmen^ and praising 
the Lord. This terminated tbe solemn service. 
The people returned to their respective homes, 
and David to his, to bless his own household and 
rejoice with them in the Divine goodnesik 

It oqght to be noticed in this place^ that the 
tabernacle which David built for the reception 
of the ark at Jerusalem, was designed by him 
only as a temporary accommodation for this sym- 
bol of the presence of Jehovah, until the splen- 
did temple which doubtless he had already been 
thinking of, should be completed. 

• It is worthy of remark, also, that Lightfoot 
and others consider the one hundred and fifth, 
the ninety-sixth^ and the one hundred and sixth 



180 DAVID. 

Psalms, as having been composed by David at 
this time The variations between them and the 
one recorded in the sixteenth chapter of the first 
book of Chronicles, are supposed to have origi- 
nated from this cause: the latter was written 
expressly for the occasion of the removal of the 
ark, while the others were corrected and enlarged 
for the temple worship. 

While David was on his way home, Michal, his 
wife, came out to meet him. She had observed 
him from a window, as the ark was entering Je- 
rusalem, leaping and dancing before it, and, we are 
told, ** despised him in her heart." She thought , 
it beneath the dignity of the sovereign of Israel 
thus to put off his royal robes, and in a humbler 
dress, as she considered it, degrade himself by 
being a mere attendant upon the ark. Herself 
the daughter of a king, and partaking, doubtless, 
of the haughty temper of Saul^ and the wife, too, 
of a great and powerful monarch, she could not 
brook this public disgrace, for so she regarded 
it, both upon David and herself. Her resent- 
ment was still rankling in her breast, and she took 
this occasion of venting it forth in the most op- 
probrious and bitter language of irony. " How 
glorious was the king of Israel to-day," she ex- 
claimed, " who uncovered himself to-day in the 
eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of 
the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself." 

The charge was as false as it was disrespectful 



DAVID. 181 

and insulting. David replied with that keenness 
of rebuke which her conduct justly merited. " It 
was before the Lord," said he, ** which chose me 
before thy father, and before all his house, to ap- 
point me ruler over the people of the Lord, over 
Israel: therefore will I play before the Lord. 
And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will 
be base in mine own sight : and of the maid-ser* 
vants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I 
be had in honor." 

So far from being a disgrace, he felt it to- be a 
high privilege to occupy the humblest place in 
the service of Jehovah. He would gladly avail 
himself of other opportunities to do this, and 
whatever Michal might think, he had no appre- 
hensions of thus losing the respect even of the 
most inferior of his subjects. 

The judgment of God, too, fell upon this proud 
-woman in consequence of her treatment of her 
husband, and th^e spirit which it manifested. ** She 
had no child uuto the day of her death." This 
must have proved to her a severe trial. For not 
to be a mother, was regarded by the married fe- 
miales among the Israelites as one of the greatest 
calamities. 

David now felt himself securely established 
upon his throne. He was enjoying the smiles of 
a kind, protecting Providence. " The Lord had 
given him rest round about from all his enemies." 
He was dwelling in his own palace, in a manner* 



182 DAVID. 

befitting the sovereign of a great nation. It was 
a splendid edifice for the time in which he lived, 
and he could not but contrast it with the less per- 
manent and costly tabernacle in which he and his 
people had just deposited the symbol of the Divine 
presence. Surely, he thought, the King of kings 
should have a residence more suited to the infi- 
nite excellence and majesty of his character. He 
made known his wishes to the prophet Nathan, 
in whom he placed great confidence, and whose 
opinion he was desirous of obtaining. " See now," 
said he, ** I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark 
of God dwelleth within curtains." If he added 
no more, this was sufficient to disclose the pious 
purpose which was glowing within his breast. 

" Go," replied the prophet, " do all that is in 
thine heart ; for the Lord is with thee." 

But this was only the private judgment of Na- 
than. The undertaking proposed by David ap^ 
peared to him, indeed, most praiseworthy, and 
promising success ; yet no Divine communication 
had been made to him on the subject. Such a 
communication he received the f9llowing night. 

He was directed to inform David that God 
would not permit him to build the temple. Among 
other reasons for this prohibition which existed 
in the Divine mind, we learn afterwards that one 
was, that David had been a man of war, and had 
shed much blood. A sovereign of a more peace- 
ful reign would be better adapted for this holy 



DAVID. 183 

enterprise. Besides, as proyed to be the case, 
David had yet enough tp do in carrying on exten- 
sive wars, to subdue the enemies of God and of 
his people. 

He was told, too, by the prophet, that, as the 
Israelites, from the time of their departure out 
of Egypt, had been in a wandering and unsettled 
state, God had chosen to have the ark of his cove* 
naat deposited in a- tabernacle, which could be 
easily removed from place to place, and had not, 
therefore, given any directions for the building 
of a house for its residence. He was reminded 
of the signal favors which the Lord had bestowed 
upon him and upon the Israelites, and assured 
that still more abundant blessings would be shed 
down upon him and them. He should have a son 
who would build that temple the erection of which 
lay so near his heart, and this son would be under 
the peculiar protection of the Almighty. In ma- 
king those promises to David and his offspring, 
expressions ^ere used which clearly pbinted out 
higher and holier privileges, a|id showed that re- 
ference was had, also, to his spiritual posterity, 
and to that Messiah, who should be one of his 
descendants, and whose kingdom should be an 
everlasting kingdom. 

On hearing this message from the lips of the 
prophet of the Lord, David immediately repaired 
to the tabernacle, there to pour out the overflow- 
ings of gratitude to God, and to invoke the con- 



Ig^ DAVID. 

tinuance of his blessings.* He felt how utterly 
unworthy he was of any of the mercies which 
had beeu bestowed upon him, and that all which 
he had received was from the sovereign graee of 
God. "Who am I, O Lord God^ and what is 
my house, that thou hast .brought me hitherto 1" 
"For thy word's sake, and according to thine 
own heart, hast thou done all these g^reat things^ 
to make thy servant know them. Wherefore 
thou art great, O Lord God i for there is none 
like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, 
according to all that we have heard with our ears." 

And " who am I, O Lord GodV may each one 
of us also say, in view of the Divine goodness 
and forbearance which have followed us all our 
lives. What are we but miserable sinners against 
the wisest and the best of beings ; and what hope 
have we but in the abundance of his mercy to- 
wards us, through .Tesus Christ ! When we thank 
him for his favors, or implore those which we 
still need,'it becomes us, like David, to prostrate 
ourselves biefore him with th« deepest humility 
and self-abasement. 

The humility of David was accompanied with 
an unshaken confidence in Jehovah, as a covenant- 
keeping God, and in the expression of this filial 
sentiment he concluded his prayer. " For thou, 

* David is supposed, about this time, to have composed 
Psalms 2, 45, 22, 16, 118 and 110. 



DAVID. 165 

O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to 
thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house: 
therefore^ hath thy servant found in his heart to 
pray this prayer unto thee. And now, O Lord 
God, thou art that God, and thy words be true, 
and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy 
servant : Therefore now let it please thee to bless 
the house of thy servant, that it may continue 
for ever before thee : for thou, O Lord God, hast 
spoken it : and with thy blessing let the house 
of thy servant be blessed for ever." 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

David subdues his enemies, and dedicates the spoilsjo God. 
He garrisons Edom, and reigns over all Israel. He is 
kind to Mephibosheth. He again is victorious over his 
enemies. 

A few years after this we find David engaged 
in a war with his old enemies the Philistines, and 
entirely subduing them. He fought, also, with 
the Moabites, making such of them as he spared . 
become tributary to him. He routed Hadadezer, 
king of Zobar, a country in Syria, who came, with 
a powerful army, to claim some territory near the 
Euphrates, and took from him immense spoils, 



186 DAVID. 

among the rest, shields of gold which he brought 
to Jerusalem. He destroyed two-and-twenty 
thousand Syrians of Damascus who came to suc- 
cor Hada^ezer, establishing garrisons in their 
country, and making them his tributaries. He 
brought from certain of the cities of the king of 
Zobah a vast quantity of brass which Solomon 
afterwards used for the service of the temple, in 
making the brazen sea, and the pillars, an^ the 
vessels of brass. The golden shields, too, were 
employed in a similar way, as were the vessels 
of silver, of gold and of brass, presented to David 
by Toi, king of Hamath, as a token of gratitude 
for the victory which the former had obtained 
over Hadadezer, the enemy of Toi. Indeed, we 
are told that David thus dedicated entirely to the 
Lord all the silver and the gold taken as spoils 
from the various nations which he subdued. 
They had forfeited it by their extreme wicked- 
ness. They were deprived of it in the prosecu- 
tion of the wars against them which God him- 
self had commanded, and it was needed for that 
magnificent building in which his glory was to 
be so signally manifested. 

The Edomites, in their turn, were subdued, 
garrisons established among them, and they made 
tributary to the Israelites. 

Thus, we are told, " The Lord preserved David 
whithersoever he went. And David reigned over 
all Israel ; and David executed judgment and jus- 



DAV1I^. 187 

tice unto all his people.'' Joab was commander- 
in-chief over all the i^rmy. Jehoshaphat was the 
recorder, who kept an account of all the public 
proceedings. Zadok and Ahimelech were the 
priests. Sercuah was th$ scribe, to act as secre* 
tary to the king. Benaiah was over the Che- 
rethites and the Felethites, who are supposed to 
have been David's body-guard, and his sons held 
the high rank of princes, or chief rulers.* 

Enjoying now a season of peace, and being free 
from any harassing public cares, David felt that 
the sacred duties of friendship had strong claims 
upon his attention. He. cherished still the live- 
liest recollection of one to whom h^ had been 
endeared by the tenderest ties, and with whom 
in early life he had made a covenant of perpetual 
attachment. How could he forget Jonathan! 
How could he fail to do all in his power to honor 
.his memory! He may have reproached himself 
for having too long neglected to do this; or, 
what is more probable, he may have long been 
intending to do it, and been only waiting for a 
favorable season to carry his benevolent design 
into effect. 

*^Is there yet," said he, inquiring among his 
attendants, ** any that is left of the house of Saul, 
that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake?'' 

Ziba, a former servant of Saul, was found and 

♦ About this time, and while gaining some of his victo- 
ries, it is thought that David composed Psalms 60 and 108. 



188 DAVID 

brought before the king, to answer this inquiry, 
who stated that there was yet a son of Jonathan 
living, who was lame in his feiet. It was Mephi- 
bosheth, who has already been referred to, to* 
gether with the cause of his lameness. 

"Where is her said David. 

" Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son 
of Ammiel," replied Ziba, " in Lo-debar," a coun- 
try probably some distance beyond the Jordan. 

David immediately despatched messengers for 
Mephibosheth, who was brought to Jerusalenu 
When he came into the presence of the king, he 
prostrated himself on the ground in the most re- 
spectful obeisance. On being called by name, he 
arose and said, " Behold thy servant." 

" Fear not," was the benignant address of 
David, " for I will surely show thee kindness for 
Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore thee 
all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt 
eat bread at my table cot^tinually." 

Mephibosheth replied, bowing himself before 
the king, '* What is thy servant, that thou should- 
est look upon such a dead dog as I am 1" He re- 
garded himself as so insignificant and inefficient 
a being, that he could hardly yet believe it possi* 
ble for this great and unexpected favor to be 
conferred upon him. 

David then sent for Ziba, and informed him of 
what was to be done for Mephibosheth. " Thou 
therefore," he added, *^ and thy sons, and thy ser- 



DiVID. 189 

Tants, shall till the land for him^ and thou shalt 
bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have 
food to eat : but Mephibosheth thy master's son 
shall eat bread alway at my table." Ziba promised 
a faithful compliance with this command, which 
he was well able to carry into execution, for be 
had fifteen sons and twenty servants; and^ we are 
told, that all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were 
servants unto Mephibosheth^ 

While we admire this striking exhibition of 
David's generosity, and of the fidelity of his 
friendship, we would do well to look back upon 
our past history, and see what delinquencies in 
this respect we may have to mourn over and re- 
pair* Our former friends, to whom we once pro- 
fessed so devoted an attachment ; whom we pro- 
mised never to forget; and whom we would al- 
ways stand ready to comfort and to aid, — ;where 
are they 1 If departed from this world, where, 
and under what circumstances, are their nearest 
and dearest relatives, — their children, left, per- 
haps, to struggle with the severest hardships and 
trials *{ Are they within our reach 1 Have we 
the means of relieving them % Can we soothe and 
cheer them 1 Can it be that we have not the heart 
to do it ! 

In the course of a few years David had still 
other wars to undertake, which were terminated 
by new victories, and increased greatly the extent 
of his dominions^ The occasion of these wars^ 



J90 DAVUX. 

strange as it may seem, was the friendly dispo«i« 
tion which David manifested towards the Am- 
monites. Nabash, the king of this people, died, 
and was succeeded by his son, Hanun. To con- 
dole with the latter on his loss, and thus to mani- 
fest thc^ grateful recollection which David re- 
tained of certain acts of kindness which he had 
received from Nahash years before, he sent seve- 
ral of his distinguished' men, as ambassadors, to 
the court of Hanun. 

The princes of this monarch regarded the 
friendly procedure of David with a suspicious 
jealousy, and made known their fears to Hanun. 
"Thinkest thou,*^ they said, "that David doth 
honor thy father, tlmt he hath sent comforters 
unto theel hath not David rather sent his ser- 
vants unto thee to search the city, and to spy it 
out, and to overthrow it V 

Hanun yielded to their suggestions, and ^as 
indignant at the aVleged treachery. Neither he, 
nor his princes, had enough generosity of soul to 
appreciate this virtue in another. Plotting mis- 
chief themselves, they were quick to dread it, 
when there was no ground whatever for thehr 
fears. Hanun took an effectual mode of showing 
his resentment. He ordered one half of the 
beards of each ambassador to be shaven off, and 
their garments to be cut off in the middle, and 
in this ridiculous and indecent plight sent thera 
back to David. 



9AYIP. 191 

The wearing of long beardff, and long garments, 
wa& at that time, as it is still in the East, a mark 
of personal dignity* The beard, especially, was 
held in great veneration, and to cut it off was 
considered matter of the deepest reproach, and 
often as deserving the severest punishment* Nb 
greater indignity could one king ofier to another 
than Hanun did to David. 

On hearing of the treatment which his ambas* 
sadors had received, who were so mortified that 
they would not incur the disgrace of coming 
home in the condition in which they were, David 
sent messengers to meet them, directing them to 
remain at Jericho, which was a desolate and re- 
tired place^ till their beards should be grown, and 
then to return* He seems to have been very de- 
liberate in his measures; and whatever steps he 
may have been devising to require an explanation 
or a redress of the wrong, they were anticipated 
by the Ammonites. . For Hanun and his people 
well knew how odious the insult offered to the 
ambassador^ would be to David, and thinking it 
certain that he would speedily seek to revenge 
it, they hired an immense number of foreign 
troops, to be added to their own forces, that they 
might be prepared for the worst. Among these 
were twenty thousand Syrian footmen, a thousand 
men of king Maacah, twelve thousand of Lsh-tob, 
and thirty-two thousand chariots of war, — a vast 
host, and demanding a formidable preparation on 



192 DAYIB. 

the part of the Israelites in order to cope with 
(hem. 

In the meanwhile, David, having heard of these 
movements, and perceiving the necessity of being 
ready to meet them, despatched a large army, 
under the command of Joab, to protect his terri- 
tories, and to act as* the occasion might demand. 
The Ammonites were not backward in provoking 
a contest. Proud of their strength, they advanced 
* with their united forces to Medeba, a city east of 
the Jordan, in the southern part of the tribe of 
Reuben, and not far from Heshbon.. There they 
marshalled themselves for battle, the Ammonites 
being near the walls of the city, and their allies 
at some distance in a neighboring field. 

Joab, who had also been advancing, found him- 
self at length, with his forces, between the two 
hostile armies. With great adroitness he imme- 
diately prepared for the emergency. He selected 
the choicest and most valiant of his troops, and 
put them in array against that portion of the ene- 
my which was drawn up in the field, taking the 
command of them himself, while he placed those 
who were left under the command of Abishai, to 
be arrayed against the Ammonites. " If,", said he, 
addressing his brother, ** the Syrians be.too strong 
for me, then thou shalt help me : but if the chil- 
dren of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I 
will come and help thee. Be of good courage, 
and let us play the men for our people, and for 



DAVID. 198 

th€ eities of our God: and the Lord do that 
which seemeth him good." 

These arrangements being made, Joab advuie^ 
ed to the attack. The Syrians were soon routed 
and put to flight. Consternation, at the sight of 
. this, seized the Ammonites, and they also fled 
before Abishai, seeking protection within the 
walls of Medeba. The army of the Israelites im- 
mediately withdrew from the field of battle and 
returned to Jerusalem, not following up the vic- 
tory, either in the pursuit of the Syrians, or the 
siege of the city. From this it would appear that 
Joab was instructed not to aim at conquest, or 
to seek the destruction of the enemy ; another 
striking proof of the pacific and magnanimous 
disposition of David. 

But the self'suflicient Syrians, mistaking this 
movement of the Israelites for one of mere cow- 
ardice, and mortified at their late defeat, rallied 
again in vast numbers, at the call of king Hadad- 
ezer, Shobach being commander-in-chief of the 
forces, and came back to renew the war. David 
now went in person, at the head of an immense 
army, to meet them. Passing the Jordan, he came 
to Helam, a city supposed to be situated on the 
river Euphrates. Here the two armies encoun- 
tered each other, and a severe battle ensued; 
David gained the victory. The Syrians fled be- 
fore him. Immense numbers of them were slain, 
of those who fought in chariots, and on horses^ 

David. 18 



194 DAYIO. 

and on foot. Shobaeh, the commander of the 
Syrians, was slain by David's own hand. The 
success of his arms, with his personal prowess 
and skill, so terrified the various kings who were 
subject to Hadadezer, that they were glad to ac* 
cept-of oflfers of peace from David, and became' . 
tributary to him. The Syrians, too, we are told 
no longer dared to afford the Ammonites any aui 
in their future conflicts with the Israelites. Sc c 
Psalms 20 and 21. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

David's conduct in the case of Bath-slieba and Uriah. 

David was now nearly, or quite fifty years of 
age ; about twenty having elapsod since he was 
crowned king of Judah at Hebron. He had ad- 
vanced, as we have seen, from one degree of 
prosperity to another, till he found himself thts 
monarch of the most powerful nation on earth'} 
beloved by his people 5 dreaded by his enemies 5 
and enjoying the greatest of all blessings, the 
peculiar protection and favor of Jehovah, 

Alas! that in the midst of such unexampled 
prosperity, he should forget his obligattom to 



DAVID. 195 

the Author of it, and sHfTer himself to fall into 
tin by yielding to the temptations which assail- 
ed him. It cannot be, that at this time he felt 
deeply his dependence on God, and daily and 
fervently raised his supplications in secret, for 
the wisdom and grace which he so much needed. 
His successes had probably inflated his pride and 
•elf-reliance. He had gained the most triumphant 
victories over his earthly enemies, but now he 
had spiritual ones to contend with, more formi- 
dable on account of their subtlety and pow- 
er. He had slain the commander of the Syrian 
hosts with his own arm ; but he had now to cope 
with the prince of darkness, while a traitor lurk- 
ed within his own bosom, and was ready to be- 
tray him into the hands of this terrific adversary 
of souls. 

David had returned from his victory over the 
Spians, to Jerusalem, and after the lapse of a 
year, despatched the whole of his military forces 
under Joab, to carry on the war against the Am- 
monites, while himself remained behind. The 
Israelites, having had several encounters with 
the enemy, in which numbers of the latter were 
slain, laid siege, at length, to Rabbah, one of their 
principal cities. 

It was in this posture of affairs that the temp- 
tation assailed David to which allusion has just 
been made. He was led by it to desire to have 
as his wife, (although he could not expect to be 



196 DATID 

married to her, for she was already the wife of 
another,) a very beautiful woman of Jernsalem. 
Her name was Bath-sheba. Hor husband was 
Uriah the Hittite, who was absent, at this time, 
with the army under Joab. David sent messen- 
gers to her, that he might carry his purpose into 
effect, and was successful. She was brought to 
the palace. She returned home a grievous sinner 
in the sight of God. David, too, incurred enor* 
mous guilt. He knew the divine commands, but 
violated them. He coveted his neighbor's wife. 
But his sin ended not here. Crime leads on to 
crime, and he who yields to temptation, andeom* 
mits one sin, knows not where hia guilt will end* 
He wished to conceal his crime, and espe- 
cially to keep it from Uriah, the husband of Bath- 
sheba. He sent for him to return from the army 
to Jerusalem. Uriah came, and David used seve- 
ral expedients to get him to return- to his own 
house, and live with Bath-sheba and^ his family 
as usual. Uriah, a brave and patriotic soldier^ 
would not do this while his fellow-soldiers and 
his general were still prosecuting the siege, and 
thus David was involved in still greater diffi 
eulty. A new and dreadful temptation presented 
itself to his mind. He began to thiidc that if 
Uriah was dead, he should not only thus be rid 
of one who could give him a great deal of trou- 
ble, but that he could then soon marry Bath- 
sfaeba. But he dared not order Uriah to be put 



DAVIO. 197 

to deaUi, for it would be too outrageous an enor- 
mity. He reaolved to accomplish by stratagem 
what he shrunk from doing openly. He despatch* 
ed Uriah back again to the army^ with a letter 
to Joab, and by this means made the man whom 
he had so grossly injured, the unconscious in- 
strument of his own destruction. That letter con- 
tained the injunction, ** Set ye Uriah in the fore- 
front of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, 
that he may be smitten, and die.'' 

Joab had not the moral courage to disobey the 
order* He may have been wicked enough, too, 
to hope that a compliance with it would serve to 
promote his worldly interests by ingratiating him- 
self still more with his sovereign. At any rate, 
he made use of the first opportunity (o carry the 
wishes of David into effect. For soon ordering 
an assault upon the city which, it will be recol- 
lected, he was besieging, Joab took care to as- 
sign Uriah a place among the foremost, and 
where he would be exposed to the greatest dan- 
ger. Some of the men of Kabbah made a sally, 
while others discharged their arrows from the 
walls, and a severe conflict ensued. Uriah feU, 
as had been expected, being deserted, it is pro- 
bable, by those who might have sustained him 
and his party ; and some of the Israelites were 
also slain. 

Joab immediately sent a messenger to David, 
to inform him of what had happened. He took 



198 DAVIJ> 

care, howeyer, tm do thit in a way which would 
not expose either himself or the king. He charg- 
ed the messenger^ saying, /^ When thou hast 
made an end of telling the matters i>f the war unto 
the king, and if so be that the king'B wrath arise, 
and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye 
so nigh unto the city when ye did fight 1 knew 
ye not that they would shoot from the wall 1 Who 
smote Abimelech the son of Jerub-besheth 1 did 
not a- woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him 
from the wall that he died in Thebez 1 why went 
ye nigh the wall 1— then «ay thou, Thy servant 
Uriah the. Hittite ia dead also." 
~ Hayii^ received this message, David sent back 
word to Joab : " Thus," said he, addressing the 
messenger, " shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not 
this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth 
one as well as another: make thy battle more 
strong ajgainst the city, and overthrow it : atid en- 
courage thou him." 

Bath-sheba, on hearing of the death ol her hua- 
band, mourned for him, as was the custom, a few 
days, with the usual ceremonies, but was soon 
married to David, and thus they both showed 
that they still cherished the attachment which 
had been formed between them^ and that nothing 
like penitence for their offences had as yet found 
its way to their heart. 

The divine testimony is left on record against 
the conduct of David in the whole of this affair { 



Davio* 199 

for we are told that iV displeased the Lord: We 
shall soon see that this displeasure was expre$s- 
ed in the most striking manner. How sad an ex- 
hibition of the deep corruption of human nature ! 
It ^hows into what dreadful sin even Ae may fall 
who gives, as David did, very satisfactory evi- 
dence of being a good man, *nd yet, forgetting 
his dependence on God, yields to the power of 
temptation, not looking, daily and fervently, to 
the throne of grace for strength to resist it. It 
calls upon us, to work out our own salvation with 
fear and tremblings bearing continually in mind, 
that it is God which work^th in us both to will and 
to do of his good pleasure. It admonishes every 
one that thinketh he standeth^ to take heed lest he 
fall. 



CHAPTER XXYIIK 



The prophet Nathan reproves David for his sins. The child 
of Bath-sheba dies. David takes Rabbah« 

Some hioiiths had now elapsed since David 
committed the sins by which he incurred such 
tremendous guilt. Uriah he had caused to be 
slain, and he felt secure against any attacks upon 



his peace from that quarter , Bath-theba he had 
taken to be his wife, and &^ had just become the 
mother of a son. He began to indulge the hope 
that the veil of secrecy would be cast orer his 
offences. But God had determined otherwise. 
Justice must have its course. In the subsequent 
part of his life David must suffer severely for 
his great wickedness; and now the time had 
come to disclose to him the Divine displeasure, 
and bring "him to a state of deej^ humiliation 
and penitence* 

Nathan, the venerable prophet, was sent to 
David by Jehovah to carry this purpose into ef- 
fect. He bore a most touching and pointed mes- 
sage. But he concealed, at first, his real design. 
His object was, to make David condemn himself. 
He began, therefore, with a parable, the most 
beautiful and pertinent of its kind of any on re- 
cord. 

" There were two men," said he, addressing 
the king, *Wn one city; the one rich, and the 
other poor. The rich man had e:tceeding many 
flocks and herds : but the poor man had nothing, 
save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought 
and nourished up ; and it grew up together with 
him, and with his children ; it did eat of his own 
meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his 
bosom, i^nd was unto him as a daughter. And 
there came. a traveller unto the rich man, and he 
spared to take of his own flock and of his own 



DAVID. 201 

herd^ to dreg» for the wayfaring man that wai 
come unto him ; but took the poor man's lamb, 
and dressed it for the man that was come to him." 

David manifested the greatest indignation at 
this wicked conduct. -His anger was kindled. He 
declared that the individual who had treated the 
poor man in this manner was worthy of death. 
^^Henhall restore the lamb fourfold," said he, 
** because he did this thing, and because he had 
no pity." 

Little did he expect the denunciation that now 
burst upon him. Tkou art iht many exclaimed the 
prophet ; accompan3ring the charge with a fear- 
ful message in the name of Jehovah. **Thus 
saith the Lord God of Israel," was its solemn in-* 
troduction, followed by a declaration of the fa- 
vors which David had experienced, at the hand 
of the Almighty, (especially in being delivered 
from the malice of Saul, and constituted king in 
his stead,) with an assurance that other bless- 
ings, had they been needed, would have been be- 
stowed upon him. " Wherefore," continued Na- 
than, ** hast thou despised the commandment of 
the Lord, to do evil in his sight 1 thou hast kill' 
ed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, tod hast 
taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him 
with the sword of the children of Ammon." 

The most terrible judgments were then de 
nounced against the trembling, conscience-struck 
king, to fall upon himself and his family, and to 



202 DAVID. 

inTolTe him in the severest domestic trials and 
disgrace. " Thou didst it secretly,?' was the con- 
clusion, of the appalling message ! " hut I will do 
this thing hefore all Israel, and hefore the sun." 

This divine message was not Jost upon the 
king. It touched his heart. It hrought him to re- 
flection, and to penitence for his guilt. I have 
tinned against the Lordj hurst forth from his lips. 
He could say no more, it was enough to show 
the sincerity and the depth of his repentance. 
The prophet imderstood it, and saw that it pro- 
ceeded from a broken and a contrite heart* He 
was authorized, in the name of his Master, to 
pronounce pardon on the offender. *^ The Lord 
also," said he, '*^hath put away thy sin: thou 
shalt not die." The death of the hody, the tem- 
poral punishpoent which David had incurred hy 
his aggravated sin, should not be indi<;^ted upon 
him, nor should he be doomed to that more ter- 
rible penalty of God's violated law, the death, 
the eternal loss of his soul. So full of mercy is 
that Being against whom we all have sinned, to 
the truly penitent. The case of the guilty king 
of Israel who thus found this mercy^ should en- 
courage even the vilest transgressor to feel that 
there is pardon and peace also for him, if he will 
but look to God for it, in the temper of mind 
which the Gospel of his Son enjoins, and in the 
way which it points out. See Psalms 51 5 32; 
33 J and 103. 



DAVID. 203 

But David, though forgiven, must be chastened, 
and that severely. " Howbeit," said the prophet 
at parting, ** because by this deed thou hast given 
great occasion ta the enemies of the Lord to 
blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee 
shall surely die«" This threatening soon began 
to take eflfect. ^* The Lord struck the child that 
Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very 
sick." The tender father, it would seem, not- 
withstanding the denunciation of the prophet, 
could not give up all hope of its recovery. He 
poured out his supplications before God in its 
behalf. He fasted, and, in the agony of his dis- 
tress, lay all night upon the earth. Some of his 
principal attendants endeavored to comfort him, 
and to persuade him to rise up and take nourish- 
ment, but to no purpose. On the seventh day 
the child died. David still remained in hicf re- 
tirement, tremblingly waiting the result. His ser- 
vants feared to let him know what had taken 
place. ** Behold," said they, ** while the child was 
yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not 
hearken unto our voice : how will he then vex 
himself, if we tell him that the child is dead 1" 

But David perceived from their appearance, 
and from their whispering to. each other, that the 
catastrophe had come, and on making an inquiry 
to that eflfect, was told that it was indeed so. He 
bowed in calm submission to the will of God 
He felt that his grief and his prayers would no 



204 DAVID. 

longer be of any avail. He considered it his duty 
to let his attendants and his people see that the 
resignation of a pious heart could fill it with 
peace. He rose from the earth, and having wash* 
ed, and anointed himself, and changed his appa* 
re], he went to the house of the Lord, and there 
publicly engaged in solemn acts of religions wor- 
ship, after which, returning to his own dwelling, 
he partook of the food that was set before him, 
to show that his fasting and grief were now at 
an end. His servants were surprised at this, and 
inquired how it was that he fasted and wept while 
the child was yet alive, but that when it was 
dead, he arose and did eat bread. 

" While the child was yet alive," he replied, 
** I fasted and wept : for I said, who can tell 
whether God will be gracious to me, that the 
child may live 1 But now he is dead, wherefore 
should I faBt!^ can I bring him back again 1 I 
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me." 

While these things were taking place, Joab, 
with the forces under his cominand, was still 
carrying on the siege of Rabbah, and at length 
succeeded in getting possession of that part of 
the city in which were the reservoirs o( water 
for the supply of the inhabitants. He immedi- 
ately despatched messengers to David, to inform 
him of this, and to request him to come with an 
additional body of soldiers, and have himself 
the honor of taking the city, which honor Joab 



DAVID. 205 

teems to have declined, and to have preferred 
that the King, his master, should enjoy it. David 
soon ^rived, and gaining possession of the city, 
returned to Jerusalem with an immense spoil, 
among which was the crown of the captive king, 
of very great value, made of gold and adorned 
with precious stones. The people ^om he 
thus conquered, including those of all the other 
cities of the Ammonites, he suhjected, as some 
think, to a severe bondage, putting them to very 
servile employments, or^ as others suppose, in- 
flicted upon them the most cruel punishments, 
in the way of a ju^t retaliation for their former 
treatment of the Israelites. 



CHAPTER XXIX 



Amnon grossly injures Tamar, and is put to death by the 
orders of Absalom^ who flees to Gesbur. Alter three 
years, Joab prevails 4ipoD David to recall him. 

/ will raise up evil against ihte oui of thine own 
house, was a part of the fearful denunciation 
which the prophet Nathan had lately uttered in 
the hearing of David, when sent, in the name of 



206 DAVID. 

Jehovah, to reprbve him' for his sins, and to let 
him know that he was ^o he severely chastised 
^ on their account. One effecting instance of the 
fulfilment of this denunciation was now about 
to take place. 

David had a daughter whose name was Tamar, 
a beautiful woman, unmarried, and the own sister 
of Absalom. Their mother was Maacha, daugh- 
ter of Talmai, king of Geshur. Amnon, the eld* 
est son of David by another wife, fell despe- 
rately in love with his half sister Tamar, and 
wished to have her regard him as her husband, 
although he knew it was impossible, and very 
wicked too, for them to be married to each other. 
Indeed, it does not appear that he had any desire 
to marry her, even if he could have done so. 
Following the advice of his friend Jonadab, a 
cousin of the king, Amnon treated Tamar in a 
very shameful and brutal manner, overwhelming 
her with disgrace and sorrow, and strange as it 
may seem, immediately conceived as violent a 
hatred towards her, as he had felt a passionate 
love before. He bade his servant turn her out 
of doors, and this wretched woman put ashes on 
her head, and rent the beautiful garments \vhich 
she wore, as tokens of her intense grief at the 
outrage which she had endured, and went on 
her way weeping, hardly knowing what course 
to take. 

In this sad plight she was met by her brother 



DAVID. 207 

Absalom, who immediately suspected what had 
happened, hut directed her to conceal the aflair, 
and go with him to his house, where she remained 
in seclusion from society, desolate and afflicted. 
Absalom was indignant at the treatment which 
his sister had receired, and harbored the most 
implacable resentment against the base author of 
it. He determined, as soon a« a favorable op* 
portunity should offer, to take revenge upon 
Amnon, but for the present kept his design with- 
in his own breast, not saying any thing to his 
brother which would excite the suspicion of the 
latter or serve to put him on his guard. David, 
too, it seems, was made acquainted with the 
criminal conduct of Amnon, and was very much 
incensed at it. But whatever reproof he may 
have administered to hia son in private it does 
not appear that he took any steps to bring him 
to justice and have him sujSer the penalty of the 
law. There is reason to think that the late evil 
example of David himseif, his neglect of the pro- 
per discipline and education of his children, and 
the unhappy influence which his having many 
wives produced upon the whole domestic state 
of his family, contributed to bring about the dis* 
astrous injury which Amnon inflicted upon Ta- 
mar, and which was only the beginning of the 
chastisements that the unhappy monarch had to 
endure. What an admonition to parents, that both 
by example and precept, with prayer, and faith 



208 DAVI©. 

and untiring persevoranoe, they striye to Wing up 
their children in the fear of God, and in obedi- 
ence to his commands. 

About thi^time, or not long after, Bath-sheba 
became the poother of anfHher son, whom David 
called Solomon, which signifies />eacea&/<; though 
we are told, that God sent by Nathan the pro 
phet, and gave to the child the name of Jedidiah, 
or beloved of the Lord, 

The state of things was such as has been de- 
scribed, in relation to Amnon and Absalom, for 
the space of two years, when the latter had a 
great sheep-shearing in Baal-haior, near to Ephra- 
im, and, as was customary, made a feast on the 
oeeasipn. He invited his brothers to be present, 
and his father, also, with bis attendants. But 
David declined, assigning as a reason for his not 
going that it would add too much to the expense 
which his son would have to incur, invoking 
however, the divine blessing upon him. Absalom 
then made a special request of his father that 
Amnon might be permitted to attend \ to which 
David, after some reluctance, gave his consent, 
and also that all his sons might join in the £esti« 
vity. Can it be that he felt soma apprehensions 
with regard to the result, and that he had his 
fears allayed by the very kind manner and press- 
ing solicitations of the wily and treacherous 
Absalom \ 

The guests were assembled, and the unsua* 



DAVID. 209 

pectiijg Amnon among the rest. In the mean- 
while, ** Absalom had commanded his servants, 
saying, Mark ye now when Amnon^s heart is 
merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite 
Amnon ; then kill him, fear not : have not I com- 
manded you 1 be eouri^eous, and be valiant.'^ 

The favorable moment came. The wine-cup 
had passed frequently and joyously round. Glad- 
ness and mirth prevailed. But see how intempe- 
rance then, as now, ministers to crime. Had 
Amnon and his brethren abstained from the in- 
toxicating and bewildering draught, and kept 
themselves self-possessed, Absalom would not 
have dared to undertake the bloody deed. But 
he knew that his guests, when he had plied them 
well with wine, would be oflf their guard, and 
that both Amnon and his friends would have but 
little, if any power of resistance. The assassins 
knew their time and their victim, and despatched 
him with, unrelenting fury on the spot. 

A scene of dismay and consternation ensued. 
The sons of David fled from it in terror, each 
mounting his mule, and directing his course 
homeward. Before their arrival a report had 
reached the king, that all his sons had been slain 
by Absalom. In the vehemence of his grief, he 
rent his garments, and cast himself prostrate on 
the earth, his attendants surrounding him in dis- 
may. But Jonadab, approaching, contradicted the 
rumor and endeavored to assuage the sorrow of 

David. 14 



210 DAVID. 

David, declaring that Amnon alone was dead, 
and that this had been deternrtined on by Absa- 
lom from the day that Tamar his sister had been 
so grossly injured. 

It was not long before the sons of the king ar- 
rived, and came into his presence. A scene of 
general lamentation followed. They wept aloud^ 
*' and the king also and uU his servants wept very 
sore." We may well suppose, too, that the re- 
collection of his own late transgressions, added 
a keener poignancy to his sorrow 5 for he could 
not but see in the murder of Amnon, how the 
vengeance of God was overtaking him, who had, 
without any provocation, caused Uriah to lose 
his life. 

Absalom, in the mean time, fled to his grand* 
father Talmai, king of Geshur, where he sought 
protection from the anger of David) and conti- 
nued an exile for the space of throe years. By 
this time David^s grief for the loss of Amnon 
began in some degree to abate, and his affection 
for Absalom, for whom, it would seem, he had 
felt a very strong- attachment, to revive, while he 
longed to have the way opened for his return to 
Jerusalem. 

Joab was. quick to perceive the feelings of 
David towards Absalom, and laid a plan to induce 
the king to recall his son. He sent to Tekoah, a 
city in the tribe of Judah, about twelve miles 
south of Jerusalem, for a woman of great dtscre* 



DA VIP. 211 

tion, and whom he koew he could safdy* employ 
to carry his design into effect. He directed her 
to-appear before the king, in the character of a 
widow, mourning the loss of her son, and clad 
in the apparel which was suited to such circum- 
stances ; telling her, at the same time, the com 
plaint which she was to make, and in what way 
to use it for the benefit of Absalom. 

She complied with his directions, and being soon 
introduced into the royal presence, prostrated her- 
self on the ground, exclaiming, ^*Help, O king." 

** What aileth thee 1" inquired David, with con- 
descending kindness. 

" I am indeed a widow woman," she replied, 
** and my husband is dead. And thy handmaid 
had two sons, and they two strove together in 
the field, and there was none to par4; them, but 
the one .smote the other, and slew him. And, be- 
hold, the whole family is risen against thy hand* 
maid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his 
brother, that we may kill him, for the life of his 
brother whom he slew ; and we will destroy the 
heir also : and so they shall quench my coal which 
is left, and shall leave to my husband neither 
name nor remainder upon the earth." She added, 
that she had come to the king for succor under 
these affecting circumstances, to be delivered 
from the destruction which, she feared, threat- 
ened both herself end her son, and that she felt 
assured her suit would not be rejected* 



2V2 DAVID. 

David wa« moved with eompassion at her story, 
and told her to return home, while he would give 
the necessary orders to prevent the evils which 
she dreaded. But the woman seemed to desire a 
still stronger protestation on the part of the king 
to that effect. She would remove, too, all scru- 
ples he might possihly entertain for rescuing her 
son from the avenger of hlood, and added, there- 
fore, with great solemnity, " My lord, O king ! 
the iniquity he on me, and on my father's house ; 
and the king and his throne he guiltless." 

'* Whosoever saith aught unto thee," rejoined 
the king, " hring him to me, and he shall not 
touch thee any more." 

But this did not satisfy her. The danger to 
which she and her son were exposed was immi* 
lent. Immediate and decisive action was ne- 
pessary. She appealed to the obligations which 
David was under to that God who had been so full 
of compassion towards him. ^^ I pray thee," said 
she, " let the king remember the Lord thy God, 
that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of 
blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy 
my son." 

" As the Lord liveth," replied David, " there 
shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth," 
confirming what he had before promised with * 
the solemnity of an oath, and thus satisfjfin^^tke 
woman that she might now press the ultHate 
object which she had in view. 



OAYiO. 213 

** Let thy handmaid," said she, ** I pray thee, 
speak one word unto my lord the king." 

" Say on," was the king's reply. 

The woman then proceeded to expostulate 
with David, and to endeavor to convince him 
that he had already reproved himself for the want 
of mercy towards Absalom, by promising to pro- 
tect her son who had killed his brother, and that 
to deny this mercy any longer to his own son' 
was inflicting an injury upon the whole nation 
whose desire was to see the oflfender restored to 
favor. To this she added, that we are all subject 
to death, and when dead cannot be revived again, 
(implying that any punishment which could be 
inflicted on Absalom, would not avajl to Inring 
Amnon to life,) and that God himself had devis- 
ed means for the safety of the man-slayer, that 
though banished for a while he might not be for 
ever driven from his presence. 

David now perceiving the drift of the woman, 
and suspecting who it was that had sent her to 
him, inquired, ^4s not the hand of Joab with 
thee in all this 1" 

She acknowledged that it was ; adding in the 
usual style of Oriental compliment, ** My lord is 
wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of 
God, to know all things that are in the earth." 

The king yielded to the entreaty in behalf of 
his son, and addressing Joab, who was either 
present all the while, or was now sent for by 



214 DAVID. 

David, told him to g6 after Absalom and bring 
him back again to Jerusalem. 

Joab rejoiced at the success he had met with, 
and bowing himself to the earth, thanked the 
king for the great fttvor which had been confer- 
red upon him. He, doubtless, congratuhted him- 
self, too, at having taken a course which would 
ingratiate him still more with the king, by open 
ing the way for David's indulging his strong pa 
rental feelings towards Absalom, while it seemed 
as if he were only yielding to the urgent solici- 
tations of Joab. It was an instance of consum- 
mate address on the part of the latter which has 
seldom, if ever, been equalled. 



^^<*^^^i^v^)%%<www»><^<VM<<%<MW» 



CHAPTER XXX. 



David is reconciled to Absalom. The rebellion of the lat- 
Ur. David flees from Jerusalem. He sends Zadok and 
Abiathaf back with the ark. 

Joab immediately went to Geshur, where Ab- 
salom was, and brought hitn back to Jerusalem. 
But, although the king thus recalled his offending 
son from exile, he ordered him to go directly to 
his own house, and not to come into the pre- 
fiience of his father; intending, in this public 



DAVID. £15 

manner, still further to show the detestation in 
which he held his crime. 

Absalom, it seems, attracted a great deal of 
admiration on account of his personal beauty. 
" From the sole of his foot even to the crown of 
his head," it is said, ** there was no blemish in 
him." He was remarkable, too, for the luxuriant 
growth and quantity of his hair, and probably 
took great pains* to dress and wear it in the most 
becoming manner. When he had occasion to cut 
it, it is supposed to have weighed about three 
pounds. He affords, as we shall see in the sequel, 
a striking instance of the worthlessness of mere 
beauty of person, if it is not accompanied with 
moral worth. And yet how prone the young are 
to admire others, or to value themselves, on ac- 
count of such beauty, and to forget that it is only 
the qualities of the heart, virtuous and benevo* 
lent affections, with the corresponding conduct, 
that should command our approbation and es- 
teem. God looketh on the heart. Examine your 
heart, my young friend. If that is not right with 
God, all your personal accomplishments, how- 
ever great they may be, will only enhance your 
final ruin by proving incentives to vanity, and 
additional allurements to sin. 

Two years had now elapsed, and Absalom be- 
gan to he very restless under the disgrace which 
he was still enduring. He sent for Joab to come 
to him, intending to induce him, if possible, to 



216 DAVID. 

intercede with the king in his hehalf. Joab 
paying no attention to the message, Ahsalom 
sent another which was alike nnsuccessfuL Be- 
coming indignant at this, and determining, at 
some rate or other, to have the desired inter- 
view, he directed his servants to set on fire a 
field of harley belonging to Joab, and which was 
contiguous to his own, expecting that this would 
perhaps bring him, in tjie way of complaint for 
the outrage, if for no other reason. He was not 
disappointed in this. Joab immediately came, to 
demand the cause of such an injury. Absalom's 
reply was brief and urgent. " Behold," said he, 
" I sent unto thee, saying. Come hither, that I 
may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore 
am I come from Geshur 1 it had been good for 
me to . have been there still. Now therefore let 
me see the king's face ; tmd if there be^any ini- 
<iuity in me, let him kill me." 

Joab had his reasons for complying with this 
request. His intercession prevailed. Absalom 
was sent for by David, and coming into the pre- 
sence of the king, did obeisance, bowing him- 
self with his face to the ground. He met with 
a gracious reception, and the king, bidding him 
rise, kissed him in token of his being forgiven 
and re^tored to fav6r. 

But Absalom, so far from being penitent for 
the murdeic of his brother, or grateful for the 
forbearance and clemency with which he had 



DAVID. 217 

been treated by his father, now began to carry 
into effect his ambitious and wicked designa of 
taking possession of the throne. He cared not 
that in doing thia he would be guilty of rebel- 
lion and treason against the rightful sovereign, 
the anointed of the Lord, and that sovereign hi* 
own father. The end he must accomplish, what* 
ever the means might be. 

He began by assuming the pomp of a prince 
who Regarded himself us the heir apparent to 
the throne, providing an equipage of splendid 
chariots and horses, and a guard of ^fty men, 
who were to run before him when he made his 
appearance in public. That he might gain the 
affections of the people, he was in the habit of 
rising early and taking his station in the road 
that led to the gate of the palace, to watch the 
approach of any one who might be coming to 
seek for justice from the king. He would ac- 
cost such a one in the most kind and familiar 
manner, inquiring the place from which he came, 
telling him that right was undoubtedly on his 
side, and lamenting, in the most false and in- 
sidious manner, that no one was' deputed by the 
king to hear him. Then he would add, to ingra- 
tiate himself still farther, with the people, " O 
that Iwere made judge in the land, that every 
man which hath any suit or cause might come 
unto me, and I would do him justice^" 

Being the king's son, he was treate<i with great 



218 DAVID. 

respect, and, often on certnin Ofscasions, those 
who approached him would do him oheisance, 
prostrating themselves hefore him on th^ ground. 
At such times, he took care to return these ci- 
vilities in the most kind and affectionate man- 
ner. He would take those by the hand who 
oflered them, and embrace them as if he bore 
towards them a very peculiar regard. In these 
and similar ways, he continued to gain the affec- 
tions of the people, until, we are told, he " stole 
the hearts of the men of Israel." So prone are 
mankind to think well of those who strive to 
pleaSe every body by their flattery, and who 
make strong assurances of what they would do 
for the public good, if they only had the power. 
Beware of those, my young friend, who would 
allure you by arts like these, to become the 
mere tool of their selfish and ambitious designs. 
It was not long before the wily Absalom be- 
gAn to think that his projeet was nearly ripe 
for execution^ He now asked permission of the 
king to go to Hebron, to perform there a re- 
ligious vow which he had made while io exile 
in Geshur, if the Lord would bring him back 
again to Jerusalem. The king^ not suspecting 
the real object of his visit, consented, and bade 
him go in peace. Unhappy father, yet to receive 
tb^ s^everest chastisements of thy transgressions 
from one of thy own children, and thus to be 
imposed upoa by a son on whom thou hadst so 



r . 



DAVID. 2J9 

tenderly doted, and whom thou hadst treated 
with so much lenity and affection. 

Before his departure Ahsalom sent secret 
emissaries throughout all the trihes, to let his 
friends know, (for by this time the plot was 
deeply and extensively laid,) that upon the 
blowing of a trumpet, the signal which should 
be given, they must proclaim him king, and as 
already reigning at Hebron. He took with him 
two hundred persons from Jerusalem as attend- 
ants, or perhaps as invited guests to the reli- 
gious feast which he proposed to celebrate, who 
as yet were ignorant of his designs, but whom 
he had little doubt he could bring over to take 
part with him. 

While offering up the sacrifices at Hebron, 
Absalom sent for Ahithophel, one of David's 
principal counsellors, from Giloh, where he re- 
sided. He was, undoubtedly, in the plot, and 
it had before been agreed upon that he should 
join Absalom at a moment's warning. He came 
without delay. His name and influence had 
great weight with the people, as holding one 
of the chief offices under the king's govern- 
ment ; and the standard of rebellion being raised, 
thousands thronged to join it. The conspiracy 
grew^ stronger, and in a short time Absalom, 
with Ahithophel to sustain him, found himself at 
the head of a very large body of men. 

In this state of things, a messenger was tent 



220 DAVID, 

by some of David*s friends, to inform iiim of 
what had tak^n place, and especially to let him 
know the strong hold which Absalom had gain- 
ed upon the afiections of the people. He saw 
that the danger was great and imminent. Per- 
haps jiis fears led hiin to magnify it as one that 
it was out of his power to resist ; or, in the deep 
penitence of his soul, he may have received this 
new chastisement as lEin expression of the divine 
displeasure against his past aggravated o/Tences, 
to which he should bow in the modt humble sub- 
mission, and not attempt to meet it. At any 
rate, his immediate orders were unto aU his at^ 
tendants, ** Arise, and let us flee ; for we shall 
not else escape from Absalom : make sp^ed to 
depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring 
evil upon us, and smite the city tvith the edge 
of the sword." On their replying that they were 
ready to do whatever he should direct, he went 
forth, and all his household and people after 
him, excepting ten of his inferior wives, whom 
he left behind to take charge of the palace. His 
servants passed on, and then his body-guard of 
Gherethites and Pelethites, and six hundred Gitt- 
ites, from Oath, under the'command of Ittai. 

But David's magnanimity would not allow 
him to consent that these strangers, who had 
ioug-ht his protection, should be involved in his 
calamity. He expressed his wonder at the sacri- 
fice they were so ready to make, and directed htai 



DAVID, 221 

to return, with Ws followers, to their own conn* 
try, adding his parting blessing, "mercy and 
truth be with thee." 

Ittai was too generous and brave to comply, 
" As the Lord liveth," said he, " and as my lord 
the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the 
king shall be, whether in death or life, even 
there also will thy servant be." 

I)avid yielding, ordered Ittai to keep on and 
cross the brook Kidron, which he did with all 
his men, and the little ones that were with him. 
After him the attendants of the king, and the 
people passed over, filling the air with their 
lamentations. David himself came last, to see 
that all was safely and wisely arranged, and the 
sad procession moved on its way towards the 
wilderness. 

Zadok and Al?iathar, the priests, with the 
whole body of the Levites, bearing the ark. of 
the covenant of the Lord, were among those 
who remained faithful to the king, and had fol- 
lowed him when he left Jerusalem. As Abiathar 
stood to see the people pass over the brook 
Kidron, they set down the ark, and he ascend- 
ed an eminence, gazing on the scene before him, 
until the people had all come out of the city. 

These ministers of religion thought that the 
symbol of the divine presence, and themselves 
its attendants, should accompany their rightful 
sovereign in this trying emergency. But David 



fU2 DAVID. 

would not consent to iu The ark he deemed of 
too sacred a character to he removed from its 
proper place, the tahemacle, amd to he exposed 
to the dangers which might await his exile. He 
felt more for the honor of God, and the puhlie 
worship which should he rendered to him, than 
for his own personal safety, and the temporary 
advantage he might enjoy from having the ark 
and the priests with him. 

" Carry hack ^he ark of God into the city," 
said the king unto Zadok ; ^' if I shall find favor 
in the eyes of the Lord, he will hring me again, 
and show me hoth it and his habitation. But if he 
thu& say, I have no delight in thee ; behold, here 
am I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto Jiim." 

** Art thou not a seer 1" he added, as if to im- 
ply in this inquiry, that it was Zadok's duty in 
that official capacity, being a prophet or teacher, 
and priest of God, to remain in his proper place, 
and instruct the people at this momentous crisis 
of the public afiairs. " Return," said he, " into 
the city in peace, and your two sons with you, 
Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abia- 
thar. See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilder- 
ness until there come word from you to certify 
me." In this way David hoped to receive from 
a source on which he could rely, such informa- 
tion as would enable him the better to ascertain 
the way both of duty and of iSafety. 

Zadok and Abiathar, in compliance with these 



DAVIB. 223 

injunctions, carried back tbe ark to Jerusalem, 
and there continued' ta abide. At this time 
Davidvcomposed Psalm 3. 

David and those who followed him, now ad- 
vanced farther on their way, and began to ascend 
mount Olivet. He *^ wept as he went up, and had 
his head covered," to ahoyv the depth of his sor- 
row, as was customary with mourners, and, for 
the same reason, ** he went barefoot ; and all the 
people that was with him covered every man his 
head, and they went up, weeping as they went up." 

To add to his afRiction, David was told of the 
defection of his counsellor Ahithophel, and that 
he was among the conspirators with Absalom. 
He knew the sagacity as well as the influence of 
this formidable man, and feeling that he must re- 
ly on the Almighty alone for protection against 
such a foe, he exclaimed, " O Lord, I pray tbee, 
turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness." 
David is supposed to have written the 55th Psalm 
with reference to Ahithophel's treachery. 



224 DAVID. 



CHAPTER XXXI 

David sends Hushai back to Jerusalep. Ziba obtains liis 
favor. Shimei curses him. Absalom's gross sin. 

On the summit of Mount Olivet, and in the pre- 
sence of his attendants, David engaged in a so* 
lemn act of religious worship, invoking the di- 
vine protection and guidance. At this critical 
moment, as if in answer to his prayers, his par- 
ticular friend, Hushai, the Archite, came to meet 
him, with his coat rent, and earth upon his head, 
as indicative of his grief at the king's calamity. 

The thought immediately occurred to David, 
that he might avail himself of Hushai's interpo- 
sition to defeat the counsel of Ahithophei. For 
this purpose he dissuaded him from going any 
farther with them, and urged his return to Jeru- 
salem, to offer his services to Absalom. In this 
way he would have an opportunity, both of de- 
feating the plans of Ahithophei, and of letting 
the king know what course the conspirators de- 
signed to take. Zadok and Abiathar, with their 
sons, were already there, and, through the latter, 
could easily inform David of any thing which 
Hushai might in this way wish to communicate. 
Hushai accordingly went back to the city, which 
was very soon in the possession of Absalom and 
his party. 



DAVID. 225 

David had passed but a little way beyond the 
top of Mount Olivet, when he was met by Ziba, 
the servant of Mephibosheth, with a couple of 
asses saddled, bearing two hundred loaves ot 
bread, a hundred bunches of raisins, as many of 
summer fruits, and a vessel of wine. On being 
asked by David what was meant by these things, 
Ziba replied, that the asses were for the use of 
the king's househoW, the bread and fruit for his 
attendants, and the wine for such as might be 
faint in the wilderness. 

" Where is thy master's son t" inquired David. 
The false and artful Ziba replied that Mephi- 
bosheth continued still at Jerusalem, expecting 
that the tide of piiblic conmibtion would turn in 
his favor, and even goiilg so far as to say, in the 
exultation of his hopes ; " To-day shall the house 
of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.'* 

Indignant at this reported treachery df one 
that he had treated with so much favor, and too 
credulously yielding to the assertions of Ziba, 
who had his private ends to gain by the false- 
hood, David said to him, " Behold, thine are all 
that pertained unto Mephibosheth." 

" I humbl}'^ beseech thee that I may find grace 
in thy sight, my lord, O king," was the farewell 
salutation of this base flktterer and calumniator. 

Do you despise such meanness 1 It was worse 
than meanness. It was the vilest wickedness, — 
an outrageous wrong against the innocent victim 

David. 15 



226 DAVID. 

of his treachery, and a heinous offence against 
God. Beware, my young friend, lest you are be- 
guilpd into some forms, perhaps less flagrant, of 
the same spirit of selfish calumny and adulation. 
Hesitate to speak ill of the absent. Never do it, 
unless compelled reluctantly to say that and that 
only which imperious duty demands. And be 
equally on your guard against flattering those 
whose friendly offices you may wish to obtain. 
Uprightness, truth, and frankness are the surest 
passports to the good-will of those whose favor 
is worth possessing. 

As David drew near to Bahurim, a small town 
in the tribe of Benjamin, he met w^ith a rude in- 
sult which showed with what meekness and sub- 
mission to the will of God, he could endure one 
of the severest trials. A man of the family of 
Saul, whose name was Shimei^ the son of Gera, 
came forth and uttered the most bitter curses 
against David. He soon, too, began to cast atones 
at the king and his attendants, exclaiming, as he 
continued his imprecations, " Gome out, come 
out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial : 
The Lord hath returned upon thee all the blood 
of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast 
reigned 5 and the Lord hath delivered the king 
dora into the hand of Absalom thy son : and, be- 
hold, * thou art taken in thy mischief, because 
thou art a bloody man." 

Abishai, the nephew of David, could not brook 



DAVID. 227 

the insult which, in the presence of all the peo- 
ple, was thus ofiere4 to the king. ^^ Why should 
this dead dog," he exclaimed, ^^ curse my lord 
the king] let me go oVer, I pray thee, and take 
off his head." 

But David rehuked this impetuosity; adding 
that as it was the will of God, in the course of 
his providence, to let these' curses he uttered, it 
was his duty to sulmiit to the indignity. " Be- 
hold," said he, '^ my son which came forth of my 
howels, seeketh my life : how much more now 
may this Benjamite do itl let him alone, and let 
him curse ; for the Lord hath hidden him. It may 
he that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and 
that the Lord will requite me good for his curs- 
ing this day." 

This forbearance of David had no effect upon 
the brutal violence Of Shimei, unless^ indeed, it 
served to aggravate it. For as the King and his 
men advanced in their course, Shimei kept up 
with them on the side of a neighboring hill, curs- 
ing as he went,^ and throwing, stones and dust 
at David. The conduct of the latter on this oc- 
casion, shows not only what command he had 
over his own temper, and what perfect control 
over his exasperated attendants, but how much 
penitence he must have felt in view of his 
past transgressions, and how much submission 
to God, in thus receiving what he regarded as a 
chastisement for them, with a most meek and 



228 DAVID. 

forgiving spirit towards the offending indiTidaaL 
Let not his example he lost upon us. Or, rather, 
let as pray for grace that we may follow the ex« 
ample of one who was hoth David's Son and Lord, 
" who, when he was reviled, reviled not again ; 
when he suffered, he threatened not; but com- 
mitted himself to Him that judgeth righteously." 

l)avid and his followers, who were beginning 
to be exhausted with the alarm and fatigue which 
they had undergone, now stopped and partook 
of such refreshments as they had taken with 
them) or could procure from the neighboring 
conntiy. David is supposed, at this time, to have 
composed Psahn 7. 

In the meanwhile, Absalom and his party, 
which had now become very nuraerous,^ together 
with his chief counsellor, Ahithophel, felt them« 
selves secure in Jerusalem. Hushai, David's 
friend, was there also, ready to avail himself of 
the earliest opportunity to profess his allegiance 
to the usurper, while in reality, as will be^ recol- 
lected, his purpose was to do all in his power to 
serve the cause of David. It was not long be- 
fore he was introduced into the presence of Ab- 
salom, whom he accosted with the loyal saluta- 
tion, twice repeated to give it the more seeming 
earnestness, of '* God save the king, God save 
the king." 

Absalom expressed great surprise, as if he 
could hardly believe such an extraordinary pro- 



DAVID. 229 

testation. " Is this thy kindness to thy friend V» 
he exclaimed ; " why wentest thou not with thy 
friend f 

Hushai was prepared with a rcfply ; ^^ Nay, hut 
whom the Lord, and this people, and all the 
men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him 
will I abide. And again, whom should I serve 1 
should I not nerve in the presence of his son 1 
as I hav« served in thy father's presence^ so will 
I be in thy presence." It was ah ambiguous an- 
swer, intended to deceive him to whom it was 
addressed, and not to be justified on the inflexi- 
ble principles of truth and integrity. But it had 
its desired efleot. It satisfied Absalom who 
now reckoned Hushai among his adherents, and 
admitted him into his counsels. 

At this time, or very soon after^ Absalom call- 
ed upon Ahithophel and hia other counsellors, 
who were assembled for the purpose, to advise 
him what course to take* Ahithophel proposed 
bold, and what appeared to him to be decisive 
measures. In doing this, he showed how utter- 
ly destitute he was, not only of all moral princi- 
ple, but even of common decency. He wished 
Absalom to do that which would cause him to be 
abhorred of his father, and so completely cut ofl!* 
every hope of reconciliation between them, that 
all now in the rebellion might remain true to the 
cause, as their own safety must then, as they 
would see, depend on their success. 



i430 DAVID. 

He advised Absalom, therefore, to treat all the 
inferior wives of David, who were left to take 
care of the palace, as if they were his own, with- 
out any restraints of fear or shame. The atro- 
cious crime was perpetrated in the most public 
manner. For the counsel of Ahithophel, we are 
told, was in those days *^ as if a man bad inquired 
at the oracle of God,'' and this counsel, wicked 
and abominable as it was, had not only the influ- 
ence of him who gave it, but the base and detest- 
able paifsions of him who received it, to give it 
weight. 

Thus was there a literal fulfilment of the pro- 
phecy of Nathan, when he came to reprove David 
for his sin, in the case of Uriah and his wife, 
and when he declared that the Lord would raise 
up evil against David out of his own house* 
" Thou didst it secretly : but I will do this thing," 
said the Lord, ^^ before all Israel, and before the 
sun." How heavily still did the chastisements 
of the divine hand fall upon this unhappy mon- 
arch, and how truly did be find that the way of 
transgressors is hard. 



DAVJD. 231 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Hushai*s counsel prevails over that of AhithopheL David 
goes to Mahanaim. Absalom's forces are defeated by 
those of David. Absalom is caught in the boughs of an 
oak. 

Another part of the counsel of Aihthophel, was, 
that Absalom would permit him, at the head of 
twelve thousand brave men, selected for the pui:- 
pose, to pursue after David that very night. '* I 
will come upon him," said he, " while he is weary 
and weak-handed and will make him afraid : and 
all the people that are with him shall flee ; and I . 
will smite the king only ;" adding, that, in this 
way (for he thought it would strike them with 
80 much dismay) the people would all be brought 
into submission to Absalom, and the civil contest 
cease. 

This prompt and decisive step, had it been ta- 
ken, would probably have been attended with 
success. When proposed it was received with 
great favor, both by Absalom and all the elders 
of Israel who were with him. What a sad proof 
of the desperate progress in wickedness which 
the ambition of this depraved son had led him to 
make, and of the cold-blooded, fiend-like delibe- 
ration with which he was ready to enter into a 
plot for the murder of his own father I 



232 DAVID. 

Before adopting this measure, however, Ahsa 
lorn thought it advisahle to get the opinion of 
Hushai with regard to it. For the latter, he 
thought, was probahly. acquainted with the con- 
dition and strength oi David and his men, Mdd 
what degree of resistance to the proposed attack 
they would be able to make. Hushai, being sent 
for, and his advice asked, saw at once the oppor- 
tunity which was a^brded him of rendering time- 
ly and signal aid to his friend the king. 

^^The Qounsel that Ahithophel hath given,' 
said he, " is not good at this time." 

He then went on to say, that Absalom well 
Imew that his father, and those who were with 
him, were men of tried valor and mighty in batn 
tie I that they were enraged and desperate, as a 
Itikear robbed of her whelps in the field ; that it 
would be difficult for Ahithophel to gnd David, 
wl^Q wfis too wary to lodge with his men in theiir 
tents, and was probably concealed in some secure 
retreat n and that the pursuers after the king 
me^ing^as they doubtless would, with some dis- 
comfiture a;t the first attack, the slaughter of 
such would strike terror ii^to the rest. Thus, he 
added, " he also that is valiant, whose heart is as 
the heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: for all 
Isrf^el knoweth that thy father is i^ mighty man, 
and they which be with him are valiant men." 

Having thus adroitly excited the fears of Absa- 
lom with regard to the course puraued by Ahitho- 



DAVID. 233 

phel, Ilushai recommended another one as the 
safest and hest, and which he thought, at the 
same tinie, would gratify the amhitious views of 
Absalom and his thirst for glory. " I counsel," 
said he', " that all Israel be generally gathered 
unto thee, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, as the 
sand that is by the sea for multitude ; ancU that 
thou go to battle in thine own person. So shall 
we come upon him in some place where he shall 
be found, and we will light upon him as the dew 
falleth on the ground : and of him and of all the 
men that are with him there shall not be left so 
much as one." He added, that if David had taken 
refuge in any fortified city, Absalom's forces 
would be able to demolish it, and secure their 
victim. 

Such was the advice of Hushai, the secret 
friend of David. It carried with it the appearance 
of great wisdom. It was immediately adopted 
by Absalom and his adherents, as decidedly pre- 
ferable to the plan of Ahithophel. Providence 
had so ordered it that such should be the result. 
" For the Lord," we are told, '* had appointed to 
defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the in- 
tent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absa- 
lom." Mysterious co-operation of the sure pur- 
poses of God, with the free and accountable 
agency of man ! The Almighty determines to 
succor David through the instrumentality of Hu- 
shai, while the latter is responsible for the decep- 



23i DAVID. 

lion which he practised, and guilty so far as he 
departed from the strict line of honesty and truth. 
Both reason and Scripture teach us to helieve 
this, though the subject is attended with difficul- 
ties which, in the opinion of the writer, no human 
intellect is able fully to solve. To disbelieve il, 
involves us in difficulties still more profound and 
inexplicable. 

Hushai, having accomplished his purpose, im- 
mediately went to inform Zadok and Abiathar of 
what had taken place, advising them to send with- 
out delay to David, to tell him not to lodge that 
night in the plains of the wilderness, but to pass, 
over the Jordan, lest he and his men should be 
overtaken and destroyed. It would seem from " 
this that Hushai had still some fears, lest Absalom 
might, after all, change his mind and yield to the 
counsel of Ahithophel. At any rate, he thought it 
the only safe course to apprise David of his dan- 
ger, whether it might be more or less immediate. 

Jonathan and Ahimaaz, the sons of the priests, 
were at this time concealed in En-rogel, or the 
fuller's fountain, on the south-east side of Jeru- 
salem, supposed by some to have been the same 
with the fountain of Siloam. For they did not- 
think it safe to be seen in the city, but waited ia 
their hiding-place to receive any communications 
from their fathers, as had been previously ar- 
ranged. These communications were now made 
to theni by a maid-servant who was employed for 



DAVID. 235 

that purpose ; and they were immediately on their 
way to convey the itttelligence to David. A lad 
that saw them and suspected their errand, ran to 
the city and made it known to Absalom, who lost 
no time in despatching some of his attendants 
after them* Jonathan and Ahimaaz seem, in some 
way, to have apprehended the danger to which 
they were exposed, and procured a place of con- 
cealment in the well of a house in Bahurim. The 
woman of the house was probably a friend of 
David, and favored them on that account ; and 
the more effectually to secure them against being 
found, she placed a covering over the well's 
mouth, and spread some ground corn thereon, as 
if to dry it in the sun. 

In the ineanwhile the pursuers were close at 
hand, and approaching the house inquired of the 
woman where they could find Jonathan and Ahi- 
maaz. She told them that they had just passed 
a neighboring stream of water ; and after a fruit- 
less search, the disappointed messengers of Ab- 
salom returned to Jerusalem. 

The woman letting the priests' sons know that 
the danger was now past, they left their retreat, 
and making all possible despatch soon communi- 
<;ated to the king the intelligence with which they 
were entrusted.* 

On hearing it, David perceived the threatening 

♦ While on the banks of the Jordan, and before crossing 
it, David is supposed to have composed Psalms 42 and 43. 



236 PAviD, 

danger, and immediately followed the counsel 
which was given him. By ^he morning light he 
and his men, having all passed safely- over the 
Jordan, pursued their march to Mahanaim. This 
was a city of the Levites,in the trihe of Gad, on 
the hrook Jabhok, which falls into the Jordan 
some distance north of the Dead Sea. Here the 
exiles halted, and soon received much kindness 
from some of the most distinguished individuals 
in that region. " Shobi, the son of Nahash, of 
Rabbah, of the children of Ammon, and Machir, 
the son of Ammiel, of Lo-debar, and Sarzillai, 
the Gileadite, of Rogelim, brought beds, and ba- 
son?, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, 
and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lea- 
tiles, and parched pulse, and honiey, lind butter, 
and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and fox 
the people that were with him to eat : for they 
said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty 
in the wilderness." 

While these things were taking plac«^, the Ufo 
of Ahithophel was brought to a close in a way to 
show the melancholy result of disappointed pride 
and ambition, and how God often abandons the 
wicked to consummate their own destxuotion. It 
seems that when he found his counsel was not 
followed by Absalom, in a fit of desperation, he 
suddenly left Jerusalem, and returned to his resi- 
dence in Giloh, and there, after arranging his 
afiairs, deliberately hung himself. 



DAVID. 287 

How deep is the gfuilt of suicide, when reason 
still retains her empire in the soul ! What a sad 
illustration it affords of the evil of sin, thus to 
urge its victim to rush unprepared into the pre- 
sence of that holy and just Being who continues 
us in life that we may consecrate it to his ser- 
vice, and who claims the sole right of removing us 
from this world only when and how he deems hest* 

It was not long hefore Absalom, following the 
counsel of Hushai, collected a large army, which 
he placed under the command of Amasa, a cousin 
of Joab, and marching with it in pursuit of David, 
encamped in the land of Gilead,. not far from 
Mahanaim. 

David, being still in that city, began now to 
take efficient measures to prepare for the battle 
which he saw must soon take place between his 
forces and those of his rebellious son. He ascer- 
tained the number of effective men on whom he 
could rely, and set captains of thousands and cap- 
tains of hundreds over them, dividing the whole 
into three parts. At the head of the first division 
he placed his able general Joab. Abishai, the 
brother of Joab, (and both, it will be recollected, 
the nephews of the king,) commanded the se- 
cond ; while the third was under Ittai, the Oittite. 
David intended to go out hiknself with his men, 
but they remonstrated against it in the strongest 
manner. "Thou shalt not go forth," they ex* 
claimed," for if we flee away, they will not carg 



238 DAVID. 

for us ; neither if half of us die, will thefr care 
for us : but now thou art worth ten thousand of 
us : therefore now it is better that thou succor 
us out of the city." 

The king yielded to their entreaties ; and while 
his forces marched out of the city, he stood near 
the gate, viewhag them as they passed, and, as 
we have reason to believe, exhorting them to 
conduct with intrepidity in the approaching con- 
flict. But although thus maintaining the rightful 
authority of his government, and manifesting the 
skill and courage of a military hero, David still 
yearned with all the tenderness of a fond father 
over Absalom. He could not endure the thought 
of his being slain, even while leading on his forces 
in this parricidal rebellion. He gave a parting 
order to the three commanders of the army, in 
the hearing of all the men. ** Deal gently," said 
he, ** for my sake with the young man, even with 
Absalom." 

The battle soon began. The conflict was a 
severe one ; but the forces of David prevailed. 
Absalom and his party were routed with a great 
slaughter, twenty thousand of his men being' 
killed. This decisive engagement took place 
near the wood of Ephraim, into which many of 
the rebel army retreated, and, in their confusion, 
being incapable of resistance, were overtaken and 
destroyed. More were slain in this'way, we are 
toldy than in the open field. 



DAVID. 239 

Absalom being met by some of David's men, 
endeavored to escape from them by fleeing into 
the w^od. The mule on which he rode passing 
under the thick boughs of a great oak, his head 
was caught in the branches of it, so that he could 
not extricate himself, and the animal passing from 
under hini^ he hung there, suspended between the 
heaven and the earth. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



Absalom is slain by Joab. The lamentation of David 
over him. 

A man who saw Absalom hanging from the 
bough of the oak, ran and told Joab of it. " Why," 
said the latter, " didst thou not smite him to the 
ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels 
of silver, and a girdle." 

"Though I should receive ^ thousand shekels 
of silver in mine hand," was the reply, "yet 
would I not put forth my hand against the king's 
son : for in our hearing the king charged thee, 
and Abishai, and Ittai, saying. Beware that none 
touch the young man Absalom." To this he add- 



240 DAVID. 

ed, that had he killed Absalom, be would hiniself 
have been exposed to lose his life; for the king 
would soon have heard of the deed, an^ even 
Joab would have been ready to bring^th^ offender 
to punishment. 

JoaVs answer was short and hurried. " I may 
not tarry thus with thee,'' was all heliad to say. 
He was bent on his purpose, and knew that de- 
spatch was necessary. He hasted to the spot 
where Absalom was, and taking three darts in his 
hand, he thrust them through the heart of Absa- 
lom, while he was yet living. To make aure of 
his victim, (as if the bloody deed was not con- 
summated,) Joab ordered ten men who bare his 
armor, to fall upon Absalom with their weapons, 
which they did, and then taking the lifeless body, 
they cast it into a deep pit in the wood, and co- 
vered it over with a great heap of stones. 

Feeling sure of a complete triumph, and that 
the rebellion would now be for ever crushed, 
Joab called his men back from the pursuit of the 
enemy by the sound of the trumpet, and the 
slaughter ceased. 

Scarcely a name appears on the records of his- 
tory, either sacred or profane, so marked with the 
vilest crimes as that of Absalom. And few mis- 
creants have come to a more untimely land. This 
murderous and incestuous parricide little expect- 
ed to die as he did, and to have such a burial- 
place. For, having no son to perpetuate his me- 



DAVID. 241 

mory, he had erected a large pillar in the king's 
dale, a short distance from Jerusalem, to which 
he had given his name, and near which he pro- 
bably intended to have his remains deposited. 
The pillar stood for years, the monument of his 
infamy ', and his name still endures, but only to 
meet with the abhorrence of all the wise and 
good. 

Much as Absalom, however, may have deserved 
to die, Joab could not be justified in putting him 
to death. He had no right to do this. He might 
easily have taken hini as a prisoner, and delivered 
him up to the king, to be dealt with as justice and 
the interests of the nation should require. Be- 
sides, he acted in direct violation of the orders 
of David, and we have reason to believe from 
vindictive and selfish motives. 

Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, had already been 
one of the bearers of an important communica- 
tion to the king, and he was now desirous of con- 
veying to him the news of the victory which had 
just been gained. On his asking permission of 
Joab to do this, the latter refused ; feeling un- 
willing that Ahimaaz should be the first and very 
unwelcome messenger to inform David of the- 
death of Absalom. Joab promised him, however, 
that on another day he should have the honor of 
bearing a message to the king, and tnen, turning 
to a man whose name was Gushi, directed him to 
go on this errand. 

David 1^ 



242 DAVID. 

Cushi was immediately on his way, running 
at full speed, which Ahimaaz observing, entreat- 
ed Joab to let him go also, and, renewing his 
request, obtained permission. Taking a nearer 
course, or being swifter of foot, he outran Cushi, 
and was the first to reach Mahanaim, 

David, in the meanwhile, was sitting in anx- 
ious suspense, between two of the gates of the 
city, to learn the fate of the battle ; and the 
watchman, who had gone up to the roof over 
the gate, to see whether any one was approach- 
ing, descried Ahimaaz at a distance, and inform- 
ed the king that he saw a man running alone. 
" If he be alone," said David, " there is tidings 
in his mouth." For he concluded that a single 
person running swiftly at such a time, must be a 
messenger from the army. 

Soon the watchman called out that he saw 
still another man running alone, and the king 
said, " he also bringeth tidings." 

As the first came nearer, the watchman ex- 
claimed that he seemed, from his running, to be 
Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok. " He is a good man," 
said David, " and cpn^eth with good tidings." 

Ahimaaz, approaching the gate, cried out, "All 
is well," and being brought before the king, pros- 
trated himself on the ground, saying, " Blessed 
be the Lord thy God, which hath delivered up 
the men that lifted up their hand against my lord 
the king " 



DAVID. 24^3 

/ ' ''Is the young man Absalom safe 1" was the 
eager inquiry of David. 

Ahimaaz gave an evasive reply ; '* When Joab 
sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, 1 saw 
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was." 

" Turn aside," said the king, " and stand here," 
expecting that the other messenger would soon * 
arrive and let him know the truth of the case. 

At this instant Cushi came. '' Tidings," said 
he, " my lord the king : for the Lord hath aveng- 
ed thee this day of all them that rose up against 
thee." 

Again the exclamation was heard with all the 
earnestness of parental solicitude, " Is the young 
man Absalom safe 1" What a moment of thrill- 
ing interest, botji for speaker and hearer ! 

The reluctant Ci;shi must tell the unwelcome 
truth. It comes like a thunderbolt from his lips 
upon the ears of the trembling father : " The 
enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise 
against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young 
man is." 

David could ask or hear no more. Overwhelm- 
ed with grief at the sudden and afflictive news, 
he retired to a chamber over the gate, there in 
solitude to give vent to his anguish, and, doubt* 
less, to pour forth his sorrows into the ear of 
One who alone, he knew, could succor and com- 
fort him in this trying hour. As he withdrew, 
however, from his sympathizing attendants, he 



244 DAVID. 

could not retrain his emotions even for a mo- 
ment, but burst forth into tears and lamentations, 
exclaiming in the bitterness of his soul 5 " O my 
son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom ! would 
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, 
my son!" 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



Joab reproves David, who shows himself to the people, ana 
they are encouraged. The tribes take counsel to bring 
back David to Jerusalem. On his Return he is met by 
Shimei, Ziba and Barzillai. The rebellion of Sheba. 
Mephibosheth proves his innocence. 

The joy of the victors was turned into mourn- 
ing, when they learned the excessive grief of the 
king for the loss of his son. They returned into 
the city, we are told, from the field of triumph, 
as it were by steidth,^* as people being ashamed 
steal away when they flee in battle." it is pro- 
bable that as a body they began to feel reproach- 
ed at having violated the king's commands with 
regard to Absalom, and at thus being the cause 
of the anguish of their beloved monikrch. For 
this anguish continued unabated. David, in hia 



DAVID. ^ 2^4^ 

seclusion, kept his face covered, as was the cus* 
torn of mourners, and still he cried with a loud 
voice, ^^ my son Ahsalom, Absalom, my son 
my son !" 

Joab was impatient at what he considered 
such weakness, and breaking in upon the king's 
retirement, accosted him in a most rude and in- 
solent manner ; telling him that he had brought 
shame upon the brave men who had, that day, 
saved his life and the lives of his family. He 
accused David of loving his enemies and hating 
his friends, and of declaring, by his conduct, 
that he had no regard for his people whether in 
high stations or in low. He said he perceived, 
that if Absalom's life had only been spared, al- 
though Joab and the whole army might have 
been slain, it would have pleased David well. 
"Now therefore," he continued, "arise, go forth, 
and speak comfortably unto thy servants : for I 
swear by the Lord, if thou go not forth there 
will not tarry one with thee this night : and that 
will be worse unto thee than all the evil that be 
fell thee from thy youth until now." 

David bore with great patience these accusa- 
tions and threats. He knew the powerful in- 
fluence which Joab had over the army, and 
;seems to have feared, under the very critical 
circumstances in which he was placed, to treat 
this violent and overbearing man, ^nd the mur- 
derer, too, of Absalom, with that severity of 



246 DAVID. 

justice which his guilty conduct demanded. He 
y^ielded, with the best grace he could, and, leav- 
ing his retirement, went and took his seat in the 
gate of the city, the place where justice was ad- 
ministered, and important business transacted, 
and where the people could easily have access 
to him. They came thither in vast numbers, to 
enjoy once more the sight of their monarch, 
and to congratulate him on his victory over his 
enemies. 

The news of this victory spread rapidly through- 
out the land. The general voice was soon in fa- 
vor of the rightful sovereign. The ingratitude 
which had been shown him, seemed to affect the 
minds of men deeply. They spoke to each other 
of the eminent services which hfi had rendered 
them, especially in delivering them from the 
hands of the Philistines, and felt the reproach 
that was cast on the whole nation by the treat- 
ment which he had lately received. Absalom, 
the traitor, whom they had so foolishly and 
wickedly chosen to be their king, was dead, 
and why, therefore, the general inquiry was, is 
not the monarch to whom our allegiance is due 
brought back, and restored to the throne 1 

David heard of these things, and took his 
aneasures accordingly. He knew the impor-* 
tance of having the tribe of Judah, and the in>- 
habitants of Jerusalem, act promptly and deci- 
dedly in his favor. As yet, there seemed to b^ 



DAVID. 247 

among them less indication of this than in the 
other parts of the land. He knew the influence 
of Zadok and Abiathar, the priests. He sent 
word to them to use it with the elders of Judah, 
and to inquire of them the reason of their delay, 
when the whole country besides were moving 
to sustain him. " Ye are my brethren," said he, 
"ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then 
are ye the last to bring back the king 1" 

He directed Zadok and Abiathar, also, to re- 
mind Amasa, the commander of the rebel army, 
that he was his kinsman, and that if he would 
return to his allegiance and duty, he should oc- 
cupy the station which was then held by Joab, 
and be the highest military officer under the king. 

This kind message had its desired effect. 
David, we are told, " bowed the heart of all the 
men of Judah, even as the heart of one man 5" 
so that they sent him word, inviting him to re- 
turn to his capital and his throne, with all his 
forces. He lost no time in doing this, and was 
immediately on his way to the banks of the 
Jordan. 

In the meanwhile the men of Judah assembled 
at Gilgal in a body, to go and meet the king, 
and conduct him over the river. A ferry boat, 
or raft, was soon in readiness to transport his 
household, and such things as he might wish to 
have conveyed across the stream. 

At this juiicture, and to appease, if possible, 



24S 0AVID. 

the indignation of David^ whom be liad so latel; 
reviled and treated in the most abusive manner^ 
Sbimei of Bahurim, the Benjamite, attended by 
a thousand men of his tribe, hasted to meet him^ 
and formed part of his escort as he crossed the 
Jordan. Prostrating himself before the king, 
in the most humble manner, he confessed the 
wrong which he had done and implored forgive- 
ness. He added that to show the sincerity of 
his repentance and loyalty, he had come the 
first to congratulate his sovereign on his return^ 
among all of the house of Joseph, by which name 
the other tribes were sometimes distinguished 
from that of Judah. Abishai could not endure 
what appeared to him to be such mean hypo« 
crisy, and exclaimed that Shimei, instead of 
being pardoned, deserved to be put to death (or 
having cursed the Lord's anointed. 

But David had too much magnanimity of soul tc 
revenge himself under such circumstances upon 
one who had injured him. He rebuked the denun* 
ciation of Abishai, in which probably Joab joined^ 
as if it had proceeded from those who were ini- 
mical to his true interests. " What have I to do 
with you," said he, " ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye 
should this day be adversaries linto me 1 shall 
there any man be put to death this day in Israel 1 . 
for do not I know that I am this day king over 
Israeli" Then, turning to Shimei and calling 
upon God to witness the sincerity of the de- 



DAVID. 249 

clarjition, he pronounced his pardon by saying, 
'' Thou Shalt not die." 

Ziba, also, the base calumniator of Mephibo- 
shetb, came on a similar errand, to propitiate 
the king, with his fifteen sons and twenty ser- 
vants, and we have reason to believe was re- 
ceived with condescension and kindness. For 
his duplicity was not yet known to David. * 

There was one, however, who came with no 
dissembled friendship, but in the sincerity of his 
heart to welcome a beloved monarch back again 
to his throne. It was the aged Barzillai, the 
Gileadite, who had furnished David such season^ 
able supplies at Mahanaim, — a man of wealth and 
distinction. 

David was rejoiced to see him, and to show 
what a grateful recollection he cherished of his 
late loyal liberality, invited him to go to Jeru- 
salem, and there be a guest at the king's own table 
during the residue of his life. But Barzillai de- 
clined, assigning his advanced age as a reason 
for this, and acknowledging the kindness which 
was proffered him in the most courteous and de- 
licate manner. " How long have I to live," said 
he, " that I should go up with the king to Jeru- 
salem 1 I am this day fourscore years old : and 
can I discern between good and evil 1 Can thy 
servant taste what I eat or what I drink 1 Can I 
hear any more the voice of singing men and 
singing women 1 Wherefore then should thy 



250 DAVID.- 

servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king 1 
Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan 
with the king: and why should the king recom- 
pense it me with such a reward 1 Let thy ser- 
vant, I pray thee, turn, back again, that I may 
die in mine own city, and be buried by the 
grave of my father and of my mother. But be- 
hold thy servant Chimham," (supposed to be the 
son of Barzillai,) " let him go over with my lord 
the king ; and do to him what shall seem good 
unto thee." 

To this proposal David most cordially assent- 
ed; promising to do both for the son and his 
father all that the latter could require. After 
passing the Jordan, he took an affectionate leave 
of Barzillai, embracing him, and giving him a 
parting blessing, when he returned to his own 
home. 

David now proceeded to Gilgal, acconipanied 
by Chimhamj the people of Judah, and great 
numbers from half of the other tribes. On reach- 
ing that place, they were met by many of the 
other remaining tribes, who had come profess- 
edly to acknowledge their allegiance to the 
king. But the men of Israel soon begaA to 
show their dissatisfaction at the course which 
had been faken ; thinking they had been neglect- 
ed, their loyalty perhaps called in question, and 
their attendance on the occasion of the king's 
return not valued as it ought ta have been. 



DAVID. 251 

"Why," said they, addressing him, "have our 
brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, 
and have brought the king, and his household, 
and all David's men with him, over Jordan 1" 

To this the men of Judah replied, as if to fur- 
nish a sufficient reason for their moving first in 
this matter, that the king was near of kin to 
them, and that they had put him to no expense 
for supplies, or received any thing like compen- 
sation from him for their servicer; inquiring, 
at the same time, what occasion there could 
possibly be for the resentment which the men 
of Israel seemed to feel. 

But the latter were not to be pacified in this 
way. They asserted their claims in still strong- 
er language. " We have ten parts," said they, 
" in the king, and we have also more right in 
David than ye : why then did ye despise us, that 
our advice should not be first had in bringing 
back our king 1*' 

This only served to make the breach still 
wider, and to lead the men of Judah to use such 
violent and opprobrious words, that all hope of 
reconciliation appeared to be at an end. A new 
rebellion broke out. For in the midst of so 
much disaffection, the elements of it were not 
wanting, nor a leader to set them in motion. A 
wicked and designing man, Sheba, the son of 
Bichri, a Benjamite, blew the trumpet of revolt, 
and cried out, " We have no part in David, 



252 PAvu). 

neither have we inheritance in the sou of Jesse r 
every man to his tents, O Israel." 

The sedition spread. The men of Israel for- 
sook David, and rallying under Sheba, followed 
him as their leader ; while the men of Jndah re- 
mained true to their king and escorted him in 
safety to Jerusalem. . 

As he was entering the city, he was met by 
Mephibosheth, the son of Saul, who came to ex- 
press his joy4it the return of David. This loyal 
subject, so basely slandered by Ziba, had been 
showing his sorrow at the exile of the king, 
during the whole time of his absence, by the 
most striking, customary signs of mourning, 
which he still exhibited. His feet had not re- 
ceived the usual cleansing, his beard was un- 
trimmed, and his clothes unwashed. 

David, seeing him in this plight, thought it a 
good opportunity to have an explanation of his 
late conduct, and inquired, why he had not at- 
tended him when he was obliged to flee from 
Jerusalem. Mephibosheth was ready with his 
reply. " My lord, O king, my servant deceived 
me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an 
ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king 5 ^ 
because thy servant is lame. And he hath slan- 
dered thy servant unto my lord the king ; but 
my lord the king is as an angel of God: do 
therefore what is good in thine eyes. For all 
of my father's house were but dead men before 



DAVID. £53 

my lord the king : yet didst thou set thy servant 
among them that did eat at thy own table. What 
right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto 
the king 1" 

David was satisfied of his innocence, and re- 
voking the late grant which he had made to Ziba, 
restored Mephibosheth to the possession of his 
former rights. This, however, was considered 
by him as of far less consequence than his regain- 
ing the favor of the king, and being considered 
by him as among his faithful friends ; and he ex- 
claimed, *^ Y«a, let him take all, for as much as 
my lord the king is come again in peace unto 
his own house." 

Thus, often in the providence of God is treach- 
ery detected, and wrong redressed. And when 
it is not so in this world, we know that a day is 
coming to give to truth and righteousness a com- 
plete triumph. Let our confidence in the justice 
of God's government be unwavering. Let us be 
found among the number of his loyal and obedi- 
ent subjects, and all will be well with us at last.* 

* David is supposed to have written Psalms 62, 143, 70 
and 71, during the rebellion of Absalom, and Psalm 144, as 
a song of thanksgiving for his victories over Absalom and 
other rebels. 



254 DAVID. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



Amasa, being sent in pursuit of Sheba, is murdered by 
Joab. Sheba is killed, and his rebellion quelled. 

One of the first things which David did after 
his return to Jerusalem, was to remove his in- 
ferior wives whom Absalom h^d treated in so 
shameful a manner, from the palace, and have 
them placed in a secure retirement, where they 
were to be maintained in a state of widowhood, 
and entirely separated from him as long as they 
lived. 

This being done, the king lost no time in 
taking the most decisive measures to subdue 
the rebellion in which Sheba and his men were 
engaged. He directed Amasa, who was now 
to take the place of Joab as commander of the 
army, to assemble the men of Judah, within three 
days, at Jerusalem. Amasa hasted to execute the 
order, but did not return by the time appointed. 
His delay caused David great uneasiness, and 
telling Abishai, another of his generals, that he 
feared Sheba would do them more harm than 
even Absalom did, he ordered him to take a suit- 
able military force, and go in pursuit of him, 
lest he should get into some of the fortified 
cities, and be secure against an attack. 



DAVID. 25£> 

Abishai immediately assembled a body of sol- 
diers called Joab's men, with the Cherethitesand 
Pelethites, and all the mighty men of war who 
were in and about Jerusalem, and went forth on 
the expedition. When they had advanced as far 
as the great rock of Gibeon, Amasa joined them 
with his forces, and took the command of the 
whole. 

It seems that Joab was with the army, but 
whether having any command or not is uncer- 
tain. He had his own purpose, however, to ac- 
complish, and this notwithstanding it led him to 
commit the crime of murder. He was not at all 
startled at this. It was familiar to him. Abner, 
Uriah, and Absalom had already been his vic- 
tims, and now he sought another unsuspecting 
one, to gratify his revenge at the indignity, as 
he supposed, which had been offered him, and 
to subserve the ends of his insatiable ambition. 
Believing that he could regain the command of 
the king's forces, only by taking the life of 
Amasa, he had no scruples about doing it. 

Watching a favorable opportunity, and wear- 
ing a sword suspended in a sheath from his 
girdle, he approached Amasa, as if to offer him 
a friendly salutation. While doing this, his 
sword dropped out of the sheath, (probably 
through design, that he might have an excuse 
for holding it without exciting suspicion,) and 
grasping it in his left hand, he said to Amasa, 



256 DAVID 

" Art thou in health, my brother 1" at the same 
time he took him by the beard with the right 
hand, as was customary, to kiss him* 

Not having the least suspicion of treachery, he 
was entirely off his guard, and Joab dexterously 
availing himself of this, plunged his 43word into 
the body of Amasa, whose bowels gushed out, 
and he fell lifeless to the ground. This base as- 
sassin then placed himself, without opposition, 
at the head of the troops, and, with his brother 
Abishai, went in pursuit of Sheba. At the same 
time, one of his men, probably by his orders, 
stood near the corpse, and as one after another 
came to examine it, he cried out, " He that fa- 
voreth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go 
after Joab." 

B»t a crowd soon gathered round the body 
of Amasa, who lay weltering in his blood, and 
stood still there as if horror-struck at the sight. 
The soldier, perceiving this, removed the corpse 
from the highway into an adjoining field, and cov- 
ered it with a cloth ; so that it ceased to attract 
notice, and all the people hastened after Joab. 

Sheba, by this time, had traversed all the tribes 
of Israel, doing what he could to stir them up to 
revolt, and adding considerably to his forcee. 
He was overtaken, at length, by Joab and his 
men, at Abel of Beth-maachah, a city in the 
northern part of Palestine, in which he took re 
fuge, and hoped to be secure. 



DAVID. 257 

Joab immediately commenced the diege of the 
place, digging a trench around it^and casting up 
A bank from which to assail those who were 
within. He proceeded also to attempt to batter 
down the walls, probably with engines construct- 
ed for the purpose. 

Some progress was making in the siege, with 
liopes of success, when one of the inhabitants, a 
woman of distinction, and remarkable for her 
wisdom, cried out to Joab, saying, that she wish- 
ed he would come near that she might speak 
with him. On his approaching, and making him- 
•elf known, she begged him to listen to heir 
words. 

" I do hear," said he. She then proceeded to ex- 
postulate with him on the injustice of attempting 
to destroy a city, venerable as that was and noted 
for the discretion and wisdom of its inhabitants, 
without first oflfering it terms of peace^ " I ^m 
one of them," said she, (speaking probably in the 
name of the city and the people,) "that are 
peaceable and faithful in Israel : thou seekest to 
destroy a city and a mother in Israel," (a mother- 
city, one of great importance and influence :) 
" why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of 
theLordr 

Joab immediately disclaimied such cruelty, say- 
ing that all he wished was to take Sheba, who 
was a rebel against David, theit rightful sove- 
reign, and that he would leave the city unmo* 

David. 17 



258 DAVID. 

lested if they would only deliver up the offender 
to him. 

The woman, in reply, told Joab that the head 
of Sheba should be thrown to him over the wall, 
and she had sufficient influeniie with those in au- 
thority to have her promise immediately fulfilled 
Joab, also, kept his engagement. He withdrew 
his forces, and disbanded the army; the soldiers 
returning to their respective homes, and himself 
to Jerusalem, while he continued to hold the 
post of chief military commander under the king, 
which he had usurped when he so treacherously 
took the life of Amasa. For it would seem that 
David, in the critical circumstances in which he 
was placed, did not think it safe to treat; Joab as 
strict justice required, so powerful was his influ- 
ence, especially over the whole body of the sol- 
diers in the various tribes. 

At this time Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, \vas 
over the Cherethites and Pelethites. Adoratn was' 
over the tribute. Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, 
was recorder. Sheba was scribe. Zadok and 
Abiathar were the priests j and Ira, the Jairite, 
was a chief ruler. 

Thus David was again securely established in 
his government, and as it would seem, too, in the 
hearts of his people. Though chastised, in the 
severest manner, for his sin s, the Lord had not 
forgotten to be gracious. That almighty arm in 
which he trusted, had sustained liim in his late 



DAVID. 269 

eonflicts, and enabled him to gain fi complete 
triumph Over those who had rebelled against him. 
We have reason to believe, that the deepest emo- 
tions of gratitude were mingled in his breast with 
those of a sincere penitence, and that while ad- 
vancing in years, this illustrious monarch was 
also ripening for heaven. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

A grievous fanaine. Seven sons of Saul are put to death. 
David subdues his enemies. 

David had soon another trial to endure, in 
which the whole nation suffered with him. There 
was a famine that continued for three successive 
years. Its severity and length seemed to indicate 
the divine displeasure against those upon whom 
it was sent, and David was led to inquire of the 
Lord the reason of it. 

" It is for Saul and for his bloody house, be- 
cause he slew the Gibeonites," was the reply. 

This people were a remnant of the Amorites, 
a name sometimes used to denote the Canaanites 
in general. They had persuaded Joshua and the 
Israelites, it will be recollected, to enter into a 
league with them, confirmed by an oath, that 



260 DAVID. 

their lives and property should he setsare. They 
were condemned, however, to he hewers of wood 
and drawers of water for all the congregatioD, 
and for the altar of the Lord, in the service of 
the tahernacle. It is supposed that they had re- 
nounced idolatry ; and they were living among 
the Israelites, a quiet, inofiensive people, faith 
fully discharging the servile duties which had 
heen imposed upon them. 

Saul, it seems, on some occasion, of which 
there is no particular account, put many of them 
to death, his own family, prohably several of his 
sons, assisting him in this work of cruelty and 
blood. He did this to ingratiate himself with the 
people, and under the pretext of great zeal for 
their interests. It was -a gross violation of the 
public faith, and a murder of the most aggravated 
kind; and being sanctioned, or at any rate not 
disapproved by the nation at large, it subjected 
them to the judgments of God, which, for some 
wise reason, were not inflicted till this time* 

David was aware of all this, and was led tCK 
conclude from the answer which he received 
from the Lord with regard to the cause of the 
famine, as well as from the demands of justice 
itself, that retribution should be made to the Gi- 
beonites, and that the perpetrators of the bloody 
deed who were still living ought to suffer for 
their crime. 

He thought it best, however, and it is not im* 



DAVID. 261 

probable that h« received divine direction to that 
effect to inquire of the Gibeonites what they 
thought should be done, so that the guilt of the 
ofienders might be expiated. " What shall I do 
for you ]'' -said he, ^* and wherewith shall I make 
the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance 
of the Lord ]" For he would not undervalue the 
good will and prayers even of this poor and de- 
graded people. 

Their answer was, ** We will hava no .silver 
nor gold of Saul, nor of his house i neither for 
us shalt thou kill any man in Israel." Private re- 
venge was not what they sought, but some mea- 
sures in the way of public justice, which should 
let the Israelites see that a repetition of such vio- 
lent wrongs could not take place with impunity. 

On David's still referring the whole matter to 
the Gibeonites, and assuring them that he would 
do whatever they might require, they replied; 
"The man that consumed us, and that devised 
against us that we should be destroyed from re- 
maining in any of the coasts of Israel, let seven 
men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we 
wiH hang them up unto the Lord," (to satisfy 
the claims of his justice,) " in Gibeah of Saul, 
whom the Lord did choose," — that is, to be king. 
They selected this, undoubtedly as the place of 
execution, because it was where Saul resided, 
and the pimishment to be inflicted would thus be 
rendered the more severe and striking. 



262 DAVID. 

David complied with their demand. He deli- 
vered up to them seven of the sons of Saul, who 
had heen concerned, as we have every reason to 
believe, in the murder of the Gibeonites, and the 
putting of whom to death would not affect at 
all the continuance of Saul's name among his de- 
scendants. He thus preserved inviolate his pro- 
mise to Saul that he would not cut off his seed 
after him, nor destroy his name out of his father's 
house. On this account, he was particularly care- 
ful to spare Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, 
from whom, in the male lin^, sprung numerous 
descendants. Indeed, of the seven that he deli- 
vered up, two were not the legal descendants of 
Saul, being the sons of his concubine Rizpah, and 
the other five were the sons of Saul-s daughter 
by Adriel, and they, had they lived, could only- 
have kept up the name of their father, and not 
that of Saul. 

These men were hung at Gibeah, in the' begin- 
ning of the barley harvest, corresponding to the 
latter part of our March of the first part of April, 
and their bodies continued to be suspended in 
the air till the- long wished for rain began to 
descend. 

In the meanwhile, Rizpah, the mother of two 
of them, was so much overcome with grief at 
their fate, and so devoted in her attachment to 
them, that she had a tent of sackcloth pitched 
near the place of execution, and there, (probably 



DAVID. 263 

with the aid of her servants,) kept a constant 
watch over the dead bodies, to protect them 
against the birds of the air by day, and the beasts 
of the field by night. This she did till they were 
taken down and interred. 

David, hearing of this, could not but sympa- 
thise with the tender feelings of such a mother, 
and as the cause of the famine was now removed 
by the return of the rain, he went to Jabesh- 
gilead, and had the bones of Saul and Jonathan 
removed from that place, and deposited, together 
with those of the seven who were executed by 
the Gibeonites, in the sepulchre of Kish, Saul's 
father. , 

He showed, in this way, that while bringing 
the guilty to punishment, as the official minister 
of divine justice, he had no personal feelings of 
resentment, and was ready to render the last sad 
offices of respect to the descendants of one from 
whom he- had formerly received the most violent 
piersectition and injury. 

After the interment which has just been men-^ 
tioned, "God," we are told, "was entreated for 
the land," and the famine ceased. 

But now David had another evil to meet. The 
Philistines waged war against him, probably deem- 
ing it a favorable time to do this, when the whole 
nation of the Israelites had been agitated and 
weakened by two rebeUions, and exhausted by a 
long and severe famine* He obtained, howeveri 



264 DAVID. 

a complete victory over them, though it ciune 
near to have cost him his life. 

Becoming fatigued in the battle, he was attack- 
ed by Ishbi-benob, a giant of immense stature, 
who would have slain him if Abishai had not 
come to his rescue and killed the Philistine. This 
exposure of their king so terrified his men, that 
they declared wifh an oath, that David should 
never again go out with them to battle, lesi ike 
light cf Israeif as they termed him, should be 
quenched. 

Soon after this there were two other engage- 
ments with the Philistines at Gob, in which t)ie 
Israelites were victorious. In the fbrmer, Sibbe- 
char, the Hushathite, slew Saph, of the race of 
the giants ; and in the latter, the brother of Go- 
liath, himself also a giant, fell, by the hand of 
Elhanan of Bethlehem. 

One more battle terminated the war, and in 
the entire discomfiture of the Philistines. It was 
fought in Gath, and here again another of their 
heroes, of enormous height and dimensions, who 
proudly defied the Israelites, was slain by Jona* 
than, a nephew of David. 

At this time, and in yiew of the signal deliv- 
erance which God had afibrded him in h^s late 
victories over the Philistines, David prepared the 
Psalm of thanksgiving which is recorded in the 
twenty-second chapter of the Second Book of 
Samuel, and which is supposed to be a revisal of 



DAVID. 265 

the eighteenth Psalm, originally composed when 
he was deliverexl from the hand of SauL 

We find, too, in the beginning of the twenty- 
third chapter a short sacred song that is sj^ken 
of as the last words of David, probably the last 
which he committed to writing, as a divinely in- 
spired composition i though some think that they 
were indeed the last which he ever uttered. 



«W\M«N>\/WV^WSA/«AA/W\/\^«W>^^ 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 



David sins in numbering the people. A pestilence ensues. 
It is at length stayed. 

From some motive, which is not particularly 
disclosed in the sacred narrative, David was led, 
after the famine had ceased, to undertake the 
numbering of the people. ^ The anger of the 
Lord," we are told, ^* was kindled against Israel, 
and he moved David against them," to do this. 
In another place, Satan is said to have provoked 
him to the performance of the act ; while, at the 
same time, it is spoken of as the result of his 
own agency. . - 

In whatever way an overruling Providence per- 
mitted, or even more directly influenced David to 
take this step, and in doing it to yield to the sug- 



"266 DAVID. 

gestions of the great adversary of souls, we must 
scrupulously avoid the regarding it in such a 
light as to make God the author of the sin, or to 
destroy the accountability of him who committed 
it, or the guilt of theuevil spirit that presented 
the temptation. To solve the difficulties attend 
ing the subject, connected as they are with the 
operations of the Infinite Mind^ is, in the opinion 
of the writer, beyond the power of finite and 
feeble intellects like ours. Far better and wiser 
it is, to admit that these difficulties exist, than 
by attempting to remove them by any subtle and 
ingenious speculations, to start other and equally 
great difficulties. It will be time, on this account, 
to dread the attacks of scoffers and infidels upon 
the word or the government of Grod, when their 
peculiar views of nature, of chance, or of fate 
are involved in no raiysterious perplexities, or pre- 
sent no absolute absurdity. ' 

The order of the king to number the people 
was addressed to Joab, who made strong objec- 
tions to it. " The Lord thy God," said he, '' add 
unto the pedple, how many soever they be, an 
hundred fold, and that the eyes of my lord the 
king may see it ; but why doth my lord the king 
delight in this thing V* The captains of the host, 
too, remonstrated against the measure, but David 
was inflexible, and the enumeration began. Joab 
and the captains of the host undertook it. It oc 
cupied nine months and twenty days, the tribea 



DAVID. 2i)7 

of Levi and Benjamin being omitted by Joab, who 
seems to have hastened the labor to a close as 
speedily as possible ; *^ for," it is said, " the 
king's word was abominable to Joat." 

Eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew 
the sword were calculated to be the number in 
Israel, and five hundred thousand in Judah, ac- 
cording to the Book of Samuel; while in the 
Book of Chronicles, the former are stated to be 
eleven hundred thousand, and the latter four hun- 
dred and seventy thousand. Some explain the dif- 
ference by supposing that in Samuel the amount 
of the standing army of Israel is omitted ; while 
others think it appears from 1 Chron. 27 : 23, 24, 
that the returns were not completed which were 
sent in to the king, and that in Samuel the num- 
ber is mentioned according to the imperfect list 
actually given in, but in Chronicles, according to 
the list not laid before the king, or inserted in the 
pul)liG records, but generally known among the 
people. There are still others who attribute the 
discrepancy to the errors which some of the tran- 
scribers of the manuscript copies of the Scrip- 
tures may have made, and which they say might 
easily have happened in places where numbers 
are mentioned. 

"David's heart smote him after that he had 
numbered the people/' In his distress he cried 
unto the Lord; "I have sinned greatly," he sdid, 
" in that I have done ; and now, I beseech thee, 



268 DAVID. 

Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servam, 
for I have done very fooKshly." 

The chastisement for his transgre-ssion was at 
hand. The next morning the prophet Gad, Da- 
vid's seer, was «ent to him by the Lord with this 
fearful message : ^ - Thus saith the Lord, I ofier 
the^ three things ; choose thee one t)f them that 

1 may do it unto thee. Shall seven years of fa- 
mine come unto thee into thy land ^ Or wilt tht>u 
flee three months before thine enemies, while they 
pursue thee 1 Or that there be three days' pesti- 
lence in thy landl" 

The prophet requiring an answer, David re- 
plied; ^U am in a great strait. Let us fall now 
into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are 
great; and let us not fall into the hand of man.'' 
He chose the pestilence as the least of aU the 
threatened evils, and it commenced that very 
morning. It was a terrible scourge, and nrkust 
have filled the land with, lamentation and wo. It 
raged three days, from one extremity of the coun- 
try to the othei^, and destroyed no- less than se- 
venty thousand persons. 

In the midst of this calanaity, David and the 
elders of Israel, whom he had assembled, clothed 
in sackcloth, humbled themselves before God, in 
a public and solemn manner, beseeching him to 
have mercy upon them and upon the 'people. 
While doing this, David beheld the destroying 
Angel, who had been sent on this errand of ven- 



DAVID. 269 

geance, standing in mid-air, with a drawn sword 
in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. It is 
probable that the elders saw him also ; for we 
are told that both. David and they, Ik if in terror 
at the sight, prostrated themselves on the eatth^ 
with their faces to the ground. 

In this attitude of fear and penitence, the king 
cried unto the Lord. " Lo ! I have sinned," he 
exclaimed, ^* and I have done wickedly 5 but these 
sheep," (alluding to his people,) '* what have they 
done 1 let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me, 
and against my father's house^ but not on thy 
people, that they should be plagued." 

The prophet Gad, then, at tlie command of 
the Angel, who, it seems, stood all the while near 
the threshing-floor of Oman the Jebusite, direct- 
ed David to go thither, and set up an altar unto 
the Lord. Oman and his four sons who were 
threshing wheat, had also seen the angel, and 
struck with fear bid themselves. But David ap-- 
proaching, with his attendants, in obedience to 
the direction of the prophet, was perceived by 
Ornin, who came forth and rose to meet him, and 
prostrated himself before the king in respectful 
obeisance. 

David made known the object of his coming, 
and proposed to buy the threshing-floor at its full 
value, that he might erect there an altar to the 
Lord, and have the plague stayed. 

But Oman declined receiving any thing. ** Take 



270 DAVID. 

it to thee," was his generous offer, " and let my 
lord the king do that which is good in his eyes : 
lo ! I give ^hee the oxen also for hurnt offerings, 
and the threshing instruments for wood, and the 
wheat for the meat offering 5 I give it all." 

Davkl refused the gift, saying that he would 
not take what belonged to Oman without paying 
for it, nor offer a sacrifice to the. Lord which cost 
him nothing. He then bought the place for six 
hundred shekels of gold, and tl^e oxen for fifty 
shekels of silver, and proceeded to build the al- 
tar, and oflbr up the burnt offerings and peace 
offerings, calling upon the Lord and imploring 
his mercy. He was answered by the miraculous 
descent of fire from heaven upon the altar, con- 
suming the sacrifice ; the destroying Angel was 
commanded to put up his sword again into the 
sheath; and the plague was stayed. 

Having obtained this favorable answer to his 
prayers and offerings, David seems to have con- 
cluded that the place which he had just purchased 
of Oman was the one which was pointed out by 
God himself for his worship in future ; and here 
he continued to. offer up sacrifices, no longer re- 
sorting to the tabernacle which was at Gibeon. 
He had feared to go thither to inquire of the Lord, 
when he saw the sword of the angel, threj^tening 
Jerusalem with the plague, (the emergency for- 
bidding such delay,) and now he adopted this new 
and propitious spot for the public worship of Je- 



DAVID. 271 

hovah, saying to his people, '' This is the hou^e 
of the Lord God, and this is the altar of the burnt 
offering for Israel." This place, supposed to have 
been Mount Moriah, was thus consecrated by Da- 
vid for the erection of the intended temple, the 
materials for which he soon began to collect.* 
In connection with the events which have just 
been described, the inquiry very aaturally pre- 
sents itself, why such an appalling judgment as 
that of the pestilence was sent upon the whole 
people on account of the transgression of their 
king 1 

The general answer to this is, that not only in 
the sacred history, but; in the usual course of 
God's providence, we find it to be a settled prin- 
ciple of his moral government, that the conduct 
of parents materially affects the condition of their 
children, and even their later posterity, for good 
or for evil, as does also that of rulers, thdse over 
whom they are placed in autliority. At the same 
time, those who suffer are themselves sinners, and 
obnoxious to punishment, and with regard to in- 
fants and others, who may seem to be involved 
beyond their deserts in the general calamity, 
there is no more difficulty attending the subject 
in view of their being carried off' by thousands 
during the prevalence of the plague among the 
Israelites, than if they had died at various times, 

♦ David is supposed |o have wrtUen Psalm 30 on the occa- 
,ion of dedicating the threshing-floor of Oman, 



^72 DAVID. 

and by various diseases, or by some sudden acci 
dents. Death has ever been doing his work oi 
destruction in our world. God sends this terrific 
messenger to call us hence, under ten thousand 
forms, and the manner in which he executes his 
commission is no part of the difficulty to be solved^ 
nor does this difficulty pres^ any more heavily 
upon the believer in divine revelation than upon 
the infidel or the atheist. The wages of sin is 
death, is the short and comprehensive reply to 
this difficulty^ and we know that the Judge of all 
the earth will do right, however far our finite ca- 
pacities may fall short of ascertaining the reasons 
which his infinite mind perceives to be the sure 
grounds o^ his unerring wisdoni and justice. 

We know, too, that at the time the pestilence 
was sent upon the Israelites they had, as a nation, 
been grievously offending God 5 so that while the 
transgression of David in numbering the people 
was the immediate occasion of th^ir suffering so 
severely, their Sufferings were no greater than 
their own sins deserved* 

In seasons of general distr^ss,^ when God seems 
to be sending his judgments upon the nation to 
which we belong, let us take care lest we seek to 
excuse ourselves from our share in the transgres- 
isions that have provoked these judgments. If wc 
are faithful in the duty of self-examination, we 
shaU find that we have individual sins enough to 
repent of^ although we may not be guilty ^of some 



DAVID. 278 

peculiar ones which go to make up the mass of 
general guilt. Others, too, let us bear in mind, 
are innocent in some respects in which we have 
sinned* in the most inexcusable and aggravated 
manner. 



CHAPTEE XXXVIII. 



David makes preparations for the building of the temple. 
His charge to Solomon and the princes. Adonijah's re- 
bellion. David orders Solomon to be anointed king. 

The preparations for the building of the tem- 
ple were now made by David with great earnest- 
ness. The plan of this magnificent building, with 
its various internal arrangements and utensils, 
was probably about this time conveyed to his 
mind by some divine communication. For he 
speaks afterwards of ** the pattern of all that he 
had by the Spirit," and says, ^* the Lord made me 
understand in writing by his hand upon me, even 
all the works of this pattern." 

He ordered the strangers 4hat were in the land 
to be assembled, (those who were not Israelites 
but yet residing among them,) to be employed in 
hewing the stones; and be began, also, to get 
ready in great abundance the iron, the brass, and 

David. 18 



274 



DAVID. 



the ceaar-trees, the last of which were supplied 
by the Zidonians and Tyrians. 

All this David did, we are told, because Solo 
mon was yet young and tender, and becaUse the 
house to be erected for the Lord must be of sur 
passing fame and glory throughout all countries 
He took care^ at the same time, to let Solomon 
know his design, and charged him, in the most 
solemn manner, to carry it into effect. He told 
him, it had long been in his mind to build such a 
temple, but that he had been expressly forbidden 
by God himself to do it, because he had been a 
man of war, and had shed much blood. But he 
added, that the same word of the Lord had as- 
sured him, that he should have a son, whose name 
should be Solomon, (that is, peaceable^) who 
should have rest from all his enemies round 
about ; in whose days peace and quietness should 
be enjoyed by the Israelites 5 and that he should 
build the temple. The Lord would be a father to 
him, and establish the throne of his kingdom over 
Israel for ever. 

" Now my son,^' continued this venerable mo- 
narch, *' the Lord be with thee ; and prosper thou» 
and build the house of the Lord thy God, as he 
hath said of thee. Only the Lord give thee wis- 
dom and understanding, and give thee eharge 
concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the law 
of the Lord thy God. Then shalt thou prosper, 
if thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes and judg* 



DAVip. 275 

ments which the Lord charged Moses \^ith con- 
cerning Israel : be strong, and of good courage j 
dread not, nor be dismayed." . - ; 

David then proceeded to tell Solomon what ar- 
rangements he had made for the work. He had 
prepared, he said, surrounded as he had been by 
trials, a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a 
million of talents of silver, ah amount of prodi- 
gious value 5* brass and iron without . weight ; 
and timber and' stone in abundance; to which 
Solomon might add, if necessary. . / . 

A solemn charge, also, was given by the king 
to all the princes, the men who.were high in rank 
and authority, to aid Solomon in this great work. 
Vis not the Lord your God," said he, "with youl 
and hath he not given you rest on ev^ty sidel 
for he hath given the inhabitants of the land into 
mine hand; and the land is subdued before the 
Lord, and before his people. Now set your heart 
and your soul to seek the Lord your God ; arise 
therefore and build ye the sanctuary of the Lord 
God, to bring the ark of the covenant of. the 
Lord, and the holy vessels of God, into the house 
that is to be built to the name of the Lord." 

David felt the necessity of thus doing what he 
had to do in this great, undertaking with prompti- 
tude and zeal : for he was now nearly seventy 

* Some estimate the gold at 507, 578, 125 pounds sterling, 
and the silver at 353, 59 1 , 666 pounds sterling. Others make 
it amount to even more than this. - . ,. ^ ^^ . ^ i 



276 DAVID. 

years old, and the infirmities of age were inereaf* 
ing upon him. Under these circumstances an* 
other domestic trial occurred, to remind him of 
the chastisement which waa yet due to his trans- 
gressions, and of the fearful denunciation of the 
Lord, through the mouth of the prophet Nathan, 
^* I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own 
house.'-' His fourth son, Adonijah, hegan to as- 
sume the honors, and set up the equipage of roy- 
alty, and to declare in the most puhlic manner 
that he would he king. Like Ahsalom, he had 
great personal heauty, and had heen treated hy 
his doting father with excessive indulgence. 
Mistaken and ruinous fondness : and now David, 
on the vci^y verge of the grave, must reap the 
fruits of it in the open rehellion of this ungrate- 
ful son. 

Adonijah had contrived to secure among the 
numher of his partisans both Joab, the command- 
er of the king's forces, and Abiathar, the priest, 
and probably with their advice withdrew to the 
rock Zoheleth, by the fountain of En-rogel, not 
far from Jerusalem, where he made a great feast, 
and invited his adherents to it. In this invitation 
were included all his brothers except Solomon, 
and some of the principal men among the king's 
attendants; though Zadok, the priest, Benaiah, 
the captain of the guards, Nathan, the prophet, 
and the mighty men of the army remained true 
in their allegiance to David, On this oocasion. 



DAVID. 277 

it would seem that Adqnijah intended to have 
himself proclaimed king, and that his purpose 
was carried into effect. 

For we find Nathan immediately inquiring of 
Bath-sheba, the mother of Solomon, if she had 
not heard of this, and telling her that it was as 
yet unknown to David. To this ^e added his 
counsel, by following which he said she might 
save her own life and that of her son. He advised 
her to lose no time in going to the king, to re- 
mind him that he had sworn to her that Solomon 
should b^ his successor on the throne, and to let 
him know that Adpnijah was pursuing a courtse 
which would defeat the fulfilment of this promise. 
" Behold," said he, ** while thou yet talkest there 
with the king, I also will come in after thee and 
confirm thy words." 

Bath-sheba went, and being introduced mto 
the presence of the king, who was confined by 
his infirmities to his chamber, made known the 
object of ner visit, in accordance with the ad- 
vice of Nathan. After urging the claims of So- 
lomon, and informing David of what Adonijah 
was doing, she* concluded by saying that the eyes 
of all Israel were upon their sovereign, waiting 
to know whom he would name as his successor, 
and that if he failed to name one, herself and 
son would be treated as criminals after his death. 

At this juncture, Nathan the prophet, as he 
had engaged to do^ came iq, and being brought 



278 DAVID. 

before the king, bowed himself with his face to 
the ground. He then thus addressed David. 

** My lordy O king, hast thou said,^ Adonijah 
shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my 
throne 1 For he is gone down this day, and hath 
slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abiindance, 
and hath called all the king^s sons, and the cap- 
tains of the host, and Abiathar the priest, and 
behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, 
God save king Adonijah. But me, even me thy 
servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the 
son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath 
he not called. Is this thing done hy my lord the 
king, and thou hast not showed it unto thy ser- 
vant who should sit on the throne of my lord 
the king after him V* , . 

The expostulations of Bath-sheba and Nathan 
had their effect. The former who had withdrawn, 
was sent for by the king, and coming into his 
presence stood before him. He then told her, 
with the solemnity of an oath, appealing to Je- 
hovah who had redeemed him out of all his dis- 
tresses, thdt as he had sworn unto her that Solo- 
mon should assuredly be his successor, he would, 
before the day was passed, certainly carry his 
purpose into effect. 

Bath-sheba, filled with joy at hearing this> 
bowed with her face to the earth, doing rever- 
ence, and said, ''Let my lord king David live 
for ever." 



DAVID. 279 

He now sent for Zadok the priest, and Nathan 
the prophet, who had retired when Bath-sheba 
came ip, and for Benaiah the captain of the 
guards, to whom he gave these orders. 

** Take," said he, "with you the servants of 
your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride up- 
on my own mule, and bring him down to Gihon," 
(this was a fountain south-east of Jerusalem;) 
" and let Zadok the priest and Nathan the pro- 
phet anoint him there king over Israel : and blow 
ye witE the trumpet, and say, God save king So- 
lomon. Then ye shall come up after him, that he 
may come and sit upon my throne; for he shall 
be king in my stead : and I have appointed him 
to be ruler over Israel and over Judah." 

To this Benaiah answered, Amen^ invoking the 
divine sanction, and praying that as the Lord 
had been with David, he would in like manner 
be with Solomon, and make his throne even great- 
er than that of his father. 

. It is both affecting and instructive to see this 
aged monarch thus anxious to discharge, to the 
last, the duties which devolved upon hirti, and 
ready to meet the exigencies of the very trying 
situation in which he was placed with firmness 
and promptitude. Nothing but an unshaken faith 
in that God in whom he trusted, and who, as he 
said, had redeemed him out of all his distresses, 
could have inspired him with this extraordinary 
decision of purpose. Look, my young friend, to 



£80 DAYID. 

the same souroe of wisdom and strength, in the 
midst of trials and difficulties however appalling^ 
and you shall be sustained under them. As long 
as life lasts; in the decline of years; and op* 
pressed it may be with the infirmities of age, as 
was David, like him hold out in iht performance 
of duty, and let death find you the persevering 
and faithful servant of the Lord 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 



BoIohkhi is a&ointed king, and pardons Adonijah. David 
assembles certain of the people,^ and addresses theM. He 
gives a charge to Solomon. 

The orders of the king were immediately car- 
ried into execution. Zadok anointed Solomon 
with the sacred oil taken from the tabernacle^ 
The trumpet gave gladsome note of the event. 
The people shouted, " God save king Solomon 5" 
and the multitude following after him, as he re- 
turned to Jerusalem, filled the air with the sobgs 
of joy and the strains of musical instruments, 
" so that the earth rent with the sound of them." 

Adonijah and his party were near enough \q 



DAVID. « '281 

heftr it. The well-known blast of the trumpet had 
already roused the fears of Joab, and he asked 
^the cause of the commotion. A messenger with 
the reply was at hand, Jonathan the son of Abi* 
athar the priests 

" Come in,'' said Adonijah, " for thou art a va* 
liant man, and bringest good tidings." > 

But his message was a fearful one to the re^ 
bels. He told them ail that had taken place, that 
David had actually caused Solomon to be crown* 
ed, and that he "was then sitting on the throne of 
the kingdom, receiving the congratulations of the 
people. " Moreover,** he added, " the king's ser- 
vants came to bless our lord king David, saying, 
God make the name of Solomon better than thy 
name, and tnake his throne greater than thy 
throne. And the king bowed himself upon his 
bed. And also thus said the king, Blessed be 
the Lord God of Israel, which hath given on^ 
to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even 
seeing it." 

This news filled Adonijah and his adherent* 
with consternation, and they fted in all directions. 
Finding himself forsaken, and dreading the ven- 
geance of Solomon, this victim of a reckless and 
disappbinted ambition, sought refuge in the sanc- 
tuary, and laying hold of the horns of the altar, 
hoped in the sacredness of the place to find a 
rcfttge. 

^lomon "mill (Speedily told of this, and that 



283 • DAVID. 

Adonijah was imploring forgiveness, and begging 
that his life might be spared. 

*' If he will show himself a worthy man," wa^ 
the reply of this magnaninsous prince, *^ there 
shall not* a hair of. him fall to the earth: but if 
wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die." 

The pardon with these conditions was con« 
veyed to Adonijah, who being brought into the 
presence of the new king, bowed himself before 
him with the usual forms and expressions of al- 
legiance. He was then permitted by Solomon to 
return in peace to his own house. 

To give stability to the throne which Solomon 
now occupied, and to ensure the loyalty of the 
nation towards him, the next step which David 
took, was, ta call together a great assembly of 
bis people at Jerusalem. All the princes of Israel 
were there, the princes^ of the. tribes, and the 
captains of the companies that ministered to the 
king by course, and the captains over the thou* 
sands, and captains over the hundreds, and the 
stewards over all the substance and possession 
of the king and of his sons, with the officers, and 
with the mighty men, and with all the valiant 
men. 

The priests and the Levites, also, were there,. 
These amounted, in David's time, to thirty-eight 
thousand ; of which twenty-four thousand were 
to set forward the work of the house of the Lord^ 
six thousand were officers and judges ; four thou 



DAVIDt 283 

sand were to be porters ; and four thousand were 
to praise the Lord with the musical instruments 
which David had caused to be made for that pur- 
pose. But this nujnber must eventually have been 
much increased ; for we find that by a regulation 
of David, not long before his death, the Levites 
were separated, from twenty years old, and up- 
wards, for the service of the temple. Till that 
time they had been numbered from the age of 
thirty years and: upwards* 

There were twenty-four courses, determined 
by lot, both of the priests and of the Levites, and 
as many courses, also, of thoi^e who were skilled 
in sacred song, and played on musical instru- 
ments, under appropriate leaders, and all for the 
service of the temple on common days,-and upon 
the great festivals. The porters were in four 
great divisions, to correspond to the four gates 
of the temple^ among other duties acting as 
guards, under their respective captains^ and cer- 
tain of the Levites were placed over the trea- 
sures of the temple, and over the treasures of 
the dedicated things; Other necessary arrange- 
ments were made, at the same time, with re- 
gard to all the matters, ecclesiastical and civil, 
that show the consummate wisdom and energy 
with which David acted, and the immense poweit 
of his kingdom. The military force was divided 
into twelve courses, of twenty-four thousand men 
each, each course serving a month, and being 



284 DAVID. 

ready for action 5 while, on any pressing eoier- 
gency, the whole, amounting to two handred and 
eighty-eight thousand fighting men, under twelve 
thousand officers, could speedily be brought into 
the field. 

David appeared in person before the vast as- 
sembly of which mention has just been made, 
and with renewed strength, given him for an oc- 
casion so solemn and momentous, stood upon his 
feet, while all listened in fixed and respectful at* 
tention, as he thus addressed them> 

" Hear me, my brethren, and my people : As 
for me, I had in mine heart to build a house of 
rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and 
for the footstool of our God, and had ihade ready 
for the building : But God said unto me, Thou 
shalt not build a house for my name, because 
thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed 
blood. Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose me 
before all the house of my father to be king over 
Israel for ever : for he hath chosen Judah to be 
the ruler $ and of the house of Judah, the house 
of my father ; and among the sons of my father 
he liked me to make me king over all Israel: 
And of all my sons, (for the Lord hath given me 
many sonsj he hath chosen Solomon my son to 
sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord 
over Israel. And he said unto me, Solomon thy 
son, he shall build my house and my courts : for 
I have chosen him to be my son^ and I witi be 



DAvlD. 285 

his father* Moreover I will establish his king- 
dom for ever, if he be constant to do my com* 
mandii\ents and my judgments, as at this day. 

" Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the 
congregation of the Lord, and in the audience 
of our God, keep and seek for all the command- 
ments of the Lord your God ; that ye may pos- 
sess this good land, and leave it for an inheriti 
ance for your children after you for ever, 

" And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the 
God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect 
heart and with a willing mind : for the Lord 
searcheth all hearts, and understand eth all the 
imaginations of the thoughts : if thou seek him, 
he will be found of thee ; but if thou forsake him^ 
he will cast thee off for ever. Tnke heed now 5 
for the Lord hath chosen thee to build a hous9 
for the sanctuary : be strong, and do it."* 

David then furnished Solomon with the plan 
of the whole buildings internal and external, giveji 
him, as he said, by the Spirit of God, with a 
scheme of the temple-service 5 the courses of the 
priests and others who were to be engaged in it j 
the patterns of the vessels, instruments, and other 
things which were necessary, and also a com- 
plete supply by weight of the metals of which 
they were to be made, both of gold and of silver. 

♦ Some suppose that at this time David composed the 91st 
Psalm, which was particularly addressed to Solomon, and 
also Psalms 62 and H5. 



286 DAVID* 

To this he added another exhortation to his 
son. " Be strong," said he, '* and of gt>od cou- 
rage, and do it : fear not, nor . he diismayed : for 
the Lord God, even my God, will he virith thee ; 
he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou 
hast finished all the work for the service of the 
house of the Lord. -And, hehold, the courses of 
the priests and the Levites, even they shall be 
with thee for all the service of the house of God: 
and there shall be with thee for all manner of 
workmanship every willing skilful man, for any 
manner of service : also the princes and all the 
people will be wholly at thy commandment." 

Be strongs and of good courage, and do it : fear 
noi^ nor be dismayed : for the Lord God^ even the 
God of David, will be with thee. Resolve, my 
young friend, in this strength of the Lord, to go 
forward in the path of known duty, whatever 
difficulties may lie in the way. Feel your own 
weakness, but rely implicitly and fearlessly on 
the Almighty arm to guide and sustain you* 
Cherishing this spirit, and acting in accordance 
with it, you will find that God will, indeed^ never 
fail you, nor forsake you, until you have finished 
all the work which He gives you to do. 



DAVID. 287 

CHAPTER XL. 



David contributes of his own property to the building of the 
temple, as do the chief men of theirs. His thanksgiving 
and prayer. Solomon is anointed king a second time. 
What David did with regard to Joab, Barzillai's sons, 
and Shimei. His death. 

On the occasion described in the preceding 
chapter, or, as some think, and perhaps with 
good reason, on a similar one, very soon follow- 
ing it, David again addressed the vast assembly 
before him. He told them that his son Solomon, 
whom God had chosen to build the temple, was 
yet young and tender, and the work great ; for 
the magnificent structure to be erected was not 
for man, but for the Lord God. He said he had 
made every preparation in his power for the 
work, gold and silver, brass, iron and wood, and 
precious stones of various kinds; and that be- 
cause he had set his affection upon the house of 
his God, he had, besides all this, and from what 
was his own peculiar property, provided three 
thousand talents of the pure gold of Ophir, and 
seven thousand talents of refined silver to overlay 
the walls of the houses.* 

• The gold, according to the estimate of some, amounted 
to 15,227,343 pounds sterling, and the silver, to 2,475,155 
pounds sterling. Others make the amount larger. 



288 DAVID. 

Having thus shown his readiness to contribute 
himself individually to the building of the tem-_ 
pie, David called upon the assembly to inquire 
who among them was willing to do the same. 
His example was cheerfully and promptly fol- 
lowed. The chief of the fathers and princes of 
the tribes, and the captains of thousands and of 
hundreds, with the rulers of the king's work, 
presented as their oflfering an immense amount 
of gold, silver, brass and iron ; while those who 
had precious stones in their possession gave 
them into the treasury of the house of the Lord. 

The sincerity and cheerfulness with which all 
this was done, both on the part of the king and 
the people, constituted the brightest and most 
delightful feature of the whole transaction, and 
a general sentiment of religious gladness and of 
mutual congratulation pervaded the breasts of 
all present. " Then the people rejoiced," we 
are told, "for that they offered willingly, be- 
cause with perfect heart they offered willingly 
to the Lord : and David the king also rejoiced 
with great joy." Indeed he could not refrain 
from bursting forth in a strain of adoring gra- 
titude and earnest supplications for the divine 
blessing, which is alike marked by its simple and 
sublime eloquence and the fervor of its piety. 

" Blessed," said he, " be thou, Lord God of 
Israel our father, for ever and ever. Thine, O 
Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the 



glory, and the victory, and the majesty : for all 
that is in the heiayeii and in the, earth is thine i 
thine. is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art ex* 
alted as head ahove all. Both riches and honor 
come of thee, and thou reignest over all ; and in 
thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand 
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. 
Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and 
praise thy glorious name. But who am I, and 
what is my people, that we should he ahle to 
offer so willingly after this sort 1 for all things 
come of thee, and of thine own have we given 
thee. For we are strangers before fhee, and 
sojourners, as were all our fathers : our days x>n 
the earth are as a shadow, and there is none 
abiding. O Lord our God, all this store that we 
have prepared to build thee a house for thine 
holy n^me cometh of thine hand^ and is all thine 
own. I know also^ my God, that thou triest the 
heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. A^ for 
me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have wil- 
lingly offered all these things: and now have I 
seen with joy thy people, which are present 
here, to offer willingly unto thee. O Lord God 
of Abraham, Isaac, imd of Israel, our fathers^ 
keep this for ever in the -imagination of the 
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare 
their heart unto thee: and give unto Solomon 
my son a perfect heart, to keep thy command- 
ments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, i^nd to 

I>«vid. ^^ 



290 DAVID. 

do all these things, and to buiTd the palace, for 
the which I have made prorision." 

David then called upon the whole congrega 
tion to bless the Lord theif God. This they did, 
lyith united voice, bowing th^ir heads in token 
of adoring reverence before God, and of respect 
ful loyalty to their king. 

On the next day, very numerous sacrifices 
and burnt-ofierittgs were offered up for all Israel, 
which wete followed by a feast that the people 
Celebrated with great gladness. Solomon was 
anointed king, a second time, and Zadok, to be 
priests One universal sentiment of allegiance 
to their new sovereign prevailed. "All Israel 
obeyed him, and all the princes, and the mighty 
men, and all the sons likewise of king David, 
submitted themselves unto Solomon the king. 
And the Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly 
in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him 
such royal majesty as had Hot been on any king 
before him in Israel." 

And now the life of DaVid was drawing near 
its close. He was himself sensible of this, and 
gave his last solemn and afiecting charge to 
Solomon. " I go," said he, " the way of all the 
earth : be thou strong therefore, and show thy* 
self a man ^ and keep the charge of the Lord 
thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his sta- 
tutes, and his commandments, and his judg- 
ments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the 



DAVID. 291 

law of MbseB, that thou mayost prosper in all 
that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest 
thyself. That th^ Lord may continue his word 
which he spake concerning me^ saying, If thy 
children take heed to their way, to walk hefore 
me in truth with all their heart and with all their 
soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on 
the throne of Israel." 

He then reminded Solomon of the guilt of Joah 
in putting to death Ahner and Amasa in cold hlood, 
and alluded, also, aar it is thought, to the great 
evil which he had inflicted upon David hy killing 
Ahsalom. " Do therefore," said he, " according 
to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down 
to the grav'e in peace." 

Thifi would h^ nothing more than inflicting 
the penalty of the law upon a murderer. David in 
his oflicial capacity might have done this hefore, 
hut feared, as we have seen, to do it, on account 
of the influence of Joah, and the peculiar state of 
puhlic affairs. The duty of bringing this atro- 
cious criminal to justice, he now devolved upon 
Solomon, leaving it to his discretion to select the 
time and the mode. 

" But show kindness," he continued, " unto the 
sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let thism he of 
those that eat at thy table : for so they came- to 
me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.". 

** And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the 
son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, which cura« 



292 IX4VID. 

ed me with a ^rieviput ctirse in th« day when 1 
went ta Mahanaim : but he came down te meet 
me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the Lord^ 
Baying, I will not put thee to death with the 
fiword. Now therefore hold him not guihless : 
for thoa art a wbe man, and knowest what thou 
oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head brin^ 
thou down ta the grave with blood." 

Some think that David intended, by what he 
said, to give an explicit direction to Solomon, to 
put Shimei to death; They say,^it is probable that 
Shimei took a part in the rebellion of Adonijah^ 
as well as in that of Absalom* David, therefore, 
warned Solomon to consider him as still cherish* 
ing his old rancorous and vindictive spirit, smd to 
be on his guard against a traitor who would, 
doubtless, soon commit some other act to render 
him obnoxious tp the punishment of 4eath, in in- 
flicting which Solomon's wisdom would direct 
him how to act discreetly and justly. < They say, 
too, that although David swore to Shimei that he 
should nc^t die, it evidently implied that David 
would not himself cause him to be put to death, 
and especially at the time when he acted in so 
traitorous and insulting a manner. He gave Shi* 
mei, as it were, a kind of reprieve, and now So* 
lomon would be at liberty, as the head of the na- 
tion, to do what he thought was right in the mat- 
ter, taking into account also the present charac- 
ter of Shimei, together with his future condcKt 



DAVID. 299 

Others 8up|>08e, among whom is the learned Dr. 
Kennicott) that the passage in which David gives 
the charge to Solomon respecting Shimei, admits 
of a different translation, and that the latter part 
of it should be thus rendered z *' Now, therefore, 
hold him not guiltless, (for thou art a wise man, 
and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him,) 
but bring not down his hoar head to the grave 
with blood." 

They add that Solomon seems evidently thus 
to have understood the charge. For so far from 
putting Shimei to death, after David's decease, 
he sent for him, and gave him an express permis- 
sion to build a house in Jerusalem, and to dwell 
there. At the same time, as if fearing his trea- 
chery, and regarding him as indeed a guilty per- 
son, he ordered Shimei on no account to leave 
the city, or pass the brook Kid r on, adding that if 
he did so, he should surely die. He violated this 
order, three years afterwards, and suffered the 
penalty. 

In his last acts, therefore, with regard to Joab 
and Shimei, the character of David is free from 
all reproach. He did nothing more than was re- 
quired of him in his official capacity, to promote 
the great ends of justice and provide for the 
welfare of the nation, while, as an individual, he 
scrupulously fulfilled his promises, and showed 
that he was infiuenced by no personal feelings of 
vindictive resentment. 



294 DAVID. 

We have thus brought the. life of this distin- 
guished monarch to its close. What the affecting 
scenes of his very last moments were, the sacred 
record does not inform us. We are only told 
that **he died in a good old age, full of days, 
riches and honor ;" that he ** slept with his fa- 
thers, and was buried in the city of David j" and 
that. ** Solomon- his son reigned in his stead." 

He had lived seventy years; having reigned 
seven years and a half over Judah at Hebron, and 
thirty*three years over all Israel, at Jerusalem. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

Coiicliiding reflections. 

David was a very extraordinary man. A vo« 
lume might be written on his character. In what 
a variety of conditions he was placed, and how 
many striking qualities both of body and mind he 
exhibited, showing that he had talents of the very 
highest order. But natural genius alone could 
not have fitted him to be what he was. He must un 
doubtedly, in youth and through the whole course 
of his life, have been a person of close and ao* 
curate discernment, of deep thought, and of in* 
dustrious application. He must have had great 
perseverance and decision ^f purpose. To thiii 



DAVip. 295 

was added that moral courage and cheerful reso- 
lution in the performance of duty which nothing 
hut true piety towards God, andean unshaken con* 
fidence in his guidance and protection, such as 
David possessed, can inspire. 

His first occupation was that of a shepherd, an 
employment of no mean or servile character, hut 
one which required much address, skill, and ho« 
dily strength and prowess. For the flocks had to 
he led to suitahle pastures, defended against the 
attacks of wild heasts and rohhers, and watched 
over with peculiar care. That he had this trust, 
while yet so young, shows the great confidence 
which was placed in him. 

But we have not time to trace the character of 
this distinguished individual minutely, in all the 
conditions, employments and relations of life 
which he sustained. He was a skilful musician i 
a prudent, hrave and successful military leader ; 
an intrepid hero ; a wise and energetic sovereign ; 
an inspired poet and prophet ; a conspicuous an- 
cestor and type of Christ 3 a dutiful son ; an af- 
fectionate brother; a loyal subject; a devoted 
patriot ; a faithful friend ; exercising a magnani- 
mous forgiveness towards his enemies; deeply 
penitent when he sinned against Gt>d, which he 
did in the most heinous manner ; and yet cherish- 
ing, as the habitual temper of his mind^ an ardent 
piety and an active benevolence. He lived and 
toiled for the glory of the Divine name and th^ 



296 DAVID. 

good of his country. He reached the highest 
summit of earthly grande^ and power, and has 
left he^^ind him a name that is one of the most 
coDspieuous among the great and good who have 
ever lived. 

While a youth he was faithful to the trusi com- 
miiied to his care. An ohscure shepherd-hoy, he 
kept his father's flocks in the quiet vales of Beth- 
lehem. In that lowly condition, he seems to have 
heen distinguished alike for his fidelity aiid cou- 
rage ; and thdugh he little thought it, was even 
then maturing for the elevated sphere which he 
afterwards filled. • 

You will never rise, my young friend, to any 
such temporal distinction as David did. But how- 
ever lowly may now he your lot, you can aspire 
to the dignity of being a child of God; 'in this 
world, a cotworker with him in his sublime plans 
of benevolence 5 an associate with the redeemed 
in heaven; and a glorified spirit, fitted for its 
high, holy and blissful employments. 

The grace that is in Christ Jesus can enable 
you to do this ; and the very condition in which 
you are now placed may, in the providence of 
God, as truly be made subservient to these great 
ends, by the moral training through which you 
pass, as was the early, obscure condition of David 
to his subsequent elevation. 

AU shepherd-boys do not become kings. But 
all children and. youth may reach a loftier desti* 



DAVID. 297 

ny, and wear a more glorious crown, if, like Da- 
vid, they will love and serve God in the morning 
of their days. 

We trace^ through the whole of David's career^ a 
deep feeling of his dependance on Gody and a con* 
iinual looking to Him for guidance and strength. 

There were, indeed, occasional exceptions to 
this; yet they were rare. He was accustomed 
to feel his weakness, and liability to errcnr and 
sin. He knew that his only security was in God. 
He sought divine direction. He relied on the 
almighty arm; and we have seen how he was 
protected, guided, and blessed in the midst of 
the severest trials ; how he was enabled to over- 
come the greatest difficulties, to discharge the 
most arduous duties, and to carry out success- 
fully the grandest and most extensive plans. 

Look to God, my young friend, as David did, 
habitually, prayerfully, and confidingly, for guid- 
ance and grace, and the same divine wisdom and 
strength shall be your never-failing security. 

When David sinned^ his penitence was cfeep, sin* 
cerey and efficacious. 

Who can doubt this, that marks the satisfacto- 
ry proof of reformation which he afforded in the 
subsequent course of his life, and in the progress 
which he evidently seems to have made in holi- 
ness. Who can doubt it, that notices the humili- 
ty and self-abasement with which he received 
the severest chastisements, at the hand of God^ 



298 DAVID. 

for his transgressions, and the breathings of a 
broken and contrite heart which flow forth in 
the ^nitential Psalms, and especially in that re- 
markable one, the fifty- first. 

Read that Psalm, my young friend. Comnut it 
to memory. Let its confessions and petitions 
often rise from your soul to the throne of the 
heavenly grace. For you, like David, are a sin- 
ner, and a great sinner. I do not mean to say 
that your sins have been as openly flagrant and 
enormous as some of his were. But do not im- 
itate the self-righteous Pharisee, and thank God 
that you are not as bad as David was. 

You have the same depraved nature. Had you 
been placed in similar circumstances, you might 
have yielded to the temptations before which he 
fell. Look into your own heart. Eecall it^ innu- 
merable unhallowed feelings and desires. Com- 
pare these with the perfectly pure and holy law 
of God, and acknowledge the amount and the ag^ 
gravation of your guilt. 

Without sincere repentance, David never could 
have been restored to the favor of God, or 
brought back to the paths of duty and of peace 
Neither can you be thus restored, rescued, and 
saved, without the same repentance. 

The repentance of David was mingled wiih faith. 
He believed the declarations, the promises, and 
the threatenipgs of God. He approached God in 
the way of his appointment. He oflTered up the 



DAVID. 299 

prescribed sacrifices. He Icne^ that without the 
shedding of blood there could be no remission 
of sin. He undoubtedly looked forward, as Abra- 
ham did, to a Savior of whose sacrifice that 
made on the Jewish altar was but the type. He 
dared not to plead any righteousness of his own. 
'* Have mercy upon md, O God, according to thy 
loving kindness i according unto' the multitude 
of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgres- 
sions," — was the simple and earnest cry which he 
raised for pardon. 

On what, my young friend, do you rely for the 
pardon of your sins % You «ee the way of salva- 
tion in the full blaze of Gospel light, while the 
king of Israel caught but a faint glimpse of it 
through the shadowy emblems of the Mosaic 
economy. That which was an obscure anticipa- 
tion to David, is to you a consummated and 
clear reality. 

You know why Christ died^ the Lamb of Gq4 
who taketh away the sins of the world. Is he 
your Savior 1 Do you trust in his atoning sacri- 
fice, for forgiveness, and accei>tance with God, 
and in his continued intercession, for those sup- 
plies of wisdom, grace, and strength, without 
which you can never discharge your duties 
aright in this world, nor be prepared for the jn 
heritance of the saints in heaven 1 % 

THB END. 



PUBLTCATION» 

•F THE * 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIET-Y. 



These works are not exceed^ in high eyadgetical ehara?- 
ler, spiritual power, and practical worth, by any spiritual col 
lection in any language. They have been carefully selected 
for the great body of intelligent readers throughom the coun- 
try»and the most watchful parent may supply them to his fam- 
ily or to others, not only with safety to their best and eternal 
interests, but with hope of the richest spiritual blessings. 



D*A0BIONK*8 HlSTOET OP TBI Rk- 

roRMATioN. A new tmn^^on, 
revised by the author, hi four vol- 
una«« ISmo, Mrith portraits. Price 
$1 75 extra cloth. 

BaITKE's SjaNTS' EVKRLASnKO 

RcsT, iSmo, in large type ; also 
28nio. 

Buntan's PiLaaiif's Prooress, 
ISmo, in taqp t^pe, and 18mo. Both 
editions newy lUostrated. 

Jat's Mornino Ezbrcubs. 

Mason's Spiritual Trkasurt, for 
every day in the year. Terse, pithy, 
and evaneelical. 

Flavkl*s Fountain op Lipk, or Re- 
demption provided. 

Flavkl's BIkthod op Gracs, or Re- 
demption applied to the Soals of 
Men. 

Bishop Hall's Scripturb Histo- 
ry, or GontemoTaiions on the Hii 
torical Passages' of the Old and New 
Testaments. 

Bishop Hopkins on thb Tkn Com - 
MANDMKMTs. Two Standard works 
of the times of Baxter. 

Prbsidknt Edwards' Thouohts 
OR Revivals. 

Vrnk's Complktb Dutt op Man. 

OwBN ON FmoiVBifBst, or Psalm 
czxx. 

GrboorV's (Olinthvs, LL.D.) Bv- 

IMUIOBS OP CmRISTIAMITT. 



Palbt's Natural Thboloot. 

Dr. Spring's Biblb not op Man, 
or the Argument for the Divhig 
Origin of the Scripturee druMm 
from the Scripturee themeeloeM, 

Nelson's Causb and Curb op In 
pioelity. 

Memoir op Mrs. Isabella Gea 
BAM. A new and standard edi- 
Uon. 

Memoir op Mrs. Sarah L. Hurt- 
iNOTON Smith. 

Sacred Sonos por Family ajid 
SocLAL Worship. Uyrans aaA 
TuSes— with a separate editioM in 
patent notes. Also, the Hynsas 
separately. 

Doddridge's Rise and Prookbss 
op Religion in the Soul. 

Edwards* Hutort op Rbdbkv* 

TION. j^ 

Volume on iVnDBLmr, comprisiaf 
five standard treatises : Soame J^m- 
yns on the Internal Evidence ; Lae- 
lie's Method with DetsU ; UttW- 
ton's Convenion of Paal ; Wataon^t 
Reply to Gibbon and Paine. 

Pike's Persuasives to Early PI- 

ETT. 

Pike's Guidb to Touno Di8cin.n« 
Anecdotes por thb Family mmb 

THE Social Cirolb. 
Univbrsalum not op Gk>p. 
Dibslr's Tkov«bts on ] 



ELCQANT PRACTICAL WORKS. 



2 



WlLBSlFOftCB's PeACTIOAI. YibW. 

Haiwah Mohk^s Practical Pibtt. 
Jamb«* Anxious iNQmmBR. 
Jay's CnmisTiAN Ck>ifTBMPLATBD. 
Elijah thb Tishbitc. 
Nbvins' Practical Tmouobts. 
Mklvil'C^s Biblb Trououts, 
l(«tod by late H«t. Dr. Mihior. 



Harru' Mammob. 
Ovrmbt's Lovb to God. 
Fostbr's Appbal to thb Toubo. 
Abbott's Youbo CnusTiAif 
Abbott's Mothbr at Homb 
Abbott's Child at Homb. 
Jambi' YoVNa Mam prom Houk. 



CHRISTIAN MEMOIRS 



Rnv. Claudius Buchanah, LL.I)., 
inolading his Christian Rsseardtos 
in Asia. 

Rbv. Johh Nbwtom. 

Rkv. Hbmrt Marttn. 

Rbv. David Brainbrd. 

Rbv. Edward Patson, D. D. 

Harribt L. Wikslow, MinioDaiy 
in India. 

Jambs Braixbrd Tatlor. 



Harlan Paob. 

NoRMAND Smith. 

Richard Baxter. 

Archbishop Lbiohton. 

Matthbw Hbnrt. 

Rbv. C. F. Schwartz, Minioomy 

to India. 
Rbv. Samubl Pbarcb. 
Rbv. Samuel Kilpin. 
Hannah Hobbie. 



OTHER SPIRITUAL WORKS. 



Edwards on the Appections. 

Baxter's Call to the Uncon- 
verted; 

Alleine's Alarm to the Uncon- 
verted. 

Flavel's Touchstonb. 

Flavel on Keeping the Heart. 

Helppenstbin's Selp-Deception. 

Pike's Reuo. and Eternal Lipe. 



Sherman's Guide to an AoqvaiiiT 

▲NGE WITH God. 
Baxter's Dtino Thoughts. 
Matthew Henry on Meeknbss. 
Andrew Fuller's Backslider. 
Scudder's Redeemer's Last Ccof- 

mand. 
Scudder's Appeal to Mothers. 
Burder's Sermons to the A«bd« 



MISCELLANEOUS WORKS. 



Bobue's Evidences op Christ't. 
Keith's Evidence op Prophecy. 
Morison's Coumsem to Youno 

Men. 
The Repormation ui Europe. 
Nbvins' Thoughts on Popery. 
tSpnrr op Popery, [wth 12 engi.J 



The Colporteur and Roman Ca 

THOLIC. 

Mason on Selp-Knowlbdoe. 
Bebcher on Intemperance. 
Raising op Lazarus prom trb 

Dead. 
Hymns por Social Worship 



POCKET MANUALS. 



Clarb»*s Scripture Promises. 
The Book op Psalms. 
The Book op Proverbs. 
Daily Scripture Expositor. 
Gems op Sacred Poetry. 
Bean and Venn's Advice ,to a 

Married Couple. 
Reasons op Repose. 
Daily Food pgr Cbristurs 



Heavenly BIanna. 

Cecil and Flavel's Oipt rcR 

Mourners. 
Daily Texts. 

Diary, [Daily Texts interlaavsd. j 
Crumbs prom the Master's Ta 

BLE. 

Milk por Babes. 
Dew-Drops. 



BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG. 



MAKT OF THEM ^EAUTIPULLT If^MTSTRATED WTTH CROKAiriiroS. 



GallafdkVs Script. BinoRitPHT, 
7 Tolt.. frMn Adam to David. 

GALLAITt)KT*9 YoiTIl's BoOK OF 

Natpral TuKOLoex* * 

Child's Book on Rkpkntanck. 
Pekp or Day. 
LdNB UPON Link. 
Prkckpt upon Prkckpt. 
Amblia.thk Pastor's Dauohtkr. 
Trkks, Fruits, and Flowkrs op 

thkBibli»[9cbu.) 
Elizabkth Balks. By John Angell 

James. 
Bmily Maria. 
Nrwton's Lkttkrb to am Adopt- 

BD Dauohtkr. 
Child's Book on thk Sabbath. 
Nathan W. Dickkrmam. 
Mary Lothrop. 
John JtlooNBY Mbad. 



iHknry Obookiah. 

j(yAROLINB (IyDK. 
GaLLaUPET's LlPB OP JOSIAH. 

The Dair|han's DAUGUTKR,flto 

Crarlks irVVlNSLOW. ' 

WiTHBRBD Branch Rbvivkd. 
Pbbt's Scripture Lessons. 
Child's Book op Bible 43toric8. 
Children op th^ Biblk. 
Amos Armpield, or the Leather 

covered Bible. 
The Child's Hymn-Book. Select 

ed by Miss Caulkins. 
Scripture Animals, [16 cuta.] 
Lkttkrb to Littlk Cuildrkm 

Pictokul Tract Primer^ 
Watts' Divine and Moral Sonob. 
With nameroiu similar worts. 



AliSO- 



Dr. Bdwards' Sabbath Manual, 
Parts 1, 3, 3, and 4. 

Dr. Edwards' Temperancb Man- 
ual. 



In German— 31 vols, various nse 
In French— 12 volumes. 
In Welsh — Pilgrim's Praj^iess 
Baxter's SaioU^ Rest and Call. 



AlsOj upwards of 1,000 Tracts and Children's Tracts, separate, boaad, m 
tn packets, afla|>ted for convenient sale by merchants and traders, many of 
them with beavtifnl en^ravinjis— in Gnftlish. German, French, Spanish, Par 
tngnese, Italian, Dolch, Danish, Swedish, an^ Welsh. 

t^^T ft is the design of the Society to issne all its pnblications in good typOk 
fi>r the poor as well as the rich ; and to sell tliem, as nearly as nay bo, at 
ooEt, that th^ flociety may neither sostain loss nor malM a profit hy all tta 
Miles. 



A 



Princeton JJnIverartj irtJrary 



|lllllllill|!l!lllll|lllllllPllll.i ,^„ 
32101 064799453 






'< 



N. 



>- 



A 



V. 



\ 



< I 



I 



* t 



I 




? [ 



.^ 



Pif>. 



