SIX SER 



THE NATURE, OCCASIONS, SIGNS, EVILS. AND REM 




INTEMPERANCE. 



LYMAN BEECHER, D. D. 



TENTH EDITION. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU STREET, NEW-YORK. 

J833. 



DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS ...... TO WIT: 

Vifirict Clerk's OJict. 

BE it remembered, that on the twenty-third day of May, 
A. D. 1827, in the fifty-first year of the Independence of the 
United Stales of America, THEOI-HU.US II. MARVIN, of the 
said District, has deposited in this Office the Title of a l?ook, 
the Right whereof he claims as Proprietor, in the Words follow- 
ing, to wit : 

" Six Sermons on the Nature, Occasions, Signs, Evils, and 
Remedy of Intemperance. By Lyman Bcccher, D. D." 

In conformity to the Act of the Congress of the United 
States, entitled " An Act for the encouragement of learning, by 
securing the copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors 
and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein men- 
tioned ;" and also to an Act entitled ' An Act supplementary to 
an Act, entitled An Act for the encouragement of learning, by 
securing the copies of maps, charts, and books to the authors and 
pr6prielors of such copies during the times therein mentioned ; 
and extending the benefits thereof to the arts of designing, en- 
graving, and etching, historical and other prints." 

Clerk of th* District 
o j Massackusetts . 



JNO W 
JNO. W. 




CONTENTS. 



SERMON I. Pnje 

The Nature and Occasions of Intemperance 5 

SERMON II. 

The Signs of Intemperance 25 

SERMON III. 
The Evils of Intemperance 47 

SERMON IV. 
The Remedy of Intemperance.., Gl 

SERMON V. 
The Remedy of Intemperance 75 

SERMON VI. 

The Remedy of Intemperance 89 



SERMON I. 



THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS OF INTEMPE- 
RANCE. 



PKOVERBS, xxiii. 29 35. 

Who hath wo? who hath sorrow ? who hath contentions ? who 
tiath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath red- 

11C" 111 

They that tarry long at the wine ; they that go to seek mixed 
wine. 

Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it eiveth his 
colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. At the List it 
bitetli like a serpent, and stin^i'tli like an adder. Tl.ine eye shall 
behold strange women, and thine heart sln.il niter perverse things. 
Yea, thou shall be as lie that lieth down in the midst of the sea, 
or as he tli.it lieth upon the top of a must. They have stricken 
me, shall thou iy, and I was nut sick ; they have beaten me, and 
I felt it not : when shall I awake? i will seek it yet again. 

THIS is a glowing description of the sin of in- 
temperance. None but the pencil of Inspiration, 
could have thrown upon the canvass so many 
and such vivid traits of this complicated evil, in 
so short a compass. It exhibits its woes and 
sorrows, contentions and babblings, and wounds 
and redness of eyes ; its smiling deceptions in 
the beginning, and serpent-bite in the end ; the 
helplessness of its victims, like one cast out 
upon the deep ; the danger of destruction, like 
that of one who sleeps upon the top of a mast ; 
I * 



6 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

the unavailing lamentations of the captive, and 
the giving up of hope and effort. "They have 
stricken me, and I was not sick ; they have 
beaten me, and 1 felt it not : when shall I awake ? 
I will seek it yet again ;" again be stricken and 
beaten ; again float upon the deep, and sleep 
upon the mast. 

No siu has fewer apologies than intemperance. 
The suffrage of the world is against it ; and yet 
there is no sin so naked in its character, and 
whose commencement and progress is indicated 
by so many signs, concerning which there is 
among mankind such profound ignorance. All 
reprobate drunkenness ; and yet, not one of the 
thousands who fall into it, dreams of danger 
when- he enters the way that leads to it. 

The soldier, approaching the deadly breach, 
and seeing rank after rank of those who preced- 
ed him swept away, hesitates sometimes, and 
recoils from certain death. But men behold the 
effects upon others, of going in given courses, 
they see them begin, advance, and end, in con- 
firmed intemperance, and unappalled rush heed- 
lessly upon the same ruin. 

A part of this heedlessness arises from the 
undefined nature of the crime in its early stages, 
and the ignorance of men, coin erning what may 
be termed the experimental indications of its 
approach. Theft and falsehood are definite ac- 
tions. But intemperance is a state of internal 
sensation, and the indications may exist long, 
and multiply, and the subject of them not be 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 7 

aware that they are the signs of intemperance. 
It is not unfrequent, that men become irre- 
claimable in their habits, without suspicion of 
danger. Nothing, therefore, seems to be more 
important, than a description of this broad ^ ay, 
.thronged by so many travellers, that the tempe- 
rate, when they come in sight cf it, may know 
their danger and pass by it and turn away. 

What I shall deliver on this subject, has been 
projected for several years, has been delayed by 
indisposition, and the pressure of other labors, 
atid is advanced now without personal or local 
reference. 

Intemperance is, the sin of our land, and, with 
our boundless prosperity, is coming in upon us 
like a flood; and if anything shall defeat the 
hopes of the world, which hang upon our expe- 
riment of civil liberty, it is that river of fire, 
which is rolling through the land, destroying the 
vital air, and extending around an atmosphere 
of death. 

It is proposed in this and the subsequent dis- 
courses,- to consider the nature, the occasions, 
the signs, the evils, and the remedy of intem- 
perance. In this discourse we shall consider 

THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS OF INTEMPERANCE. 

The more common apprehension is, that no- 
thing is intemperance, which does not supersede 
the regular operations of the mental faculties 
and the bodily organs. However much a man 
may consume of ardent spirits, if he can com- 



8 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

mand his mind, his utterance, and his bodily 
members, he is hot reputed intemperate. And 
yet, drinking within these limits, he may be in- 
temperate in respect to inordinate desire, the 
quantity consumed, the expense incurred, the ' 
present effect on his health and temper, and 
moral sensibilities, and what is more, in respect 
to the ultimate and inevitable results of bodily 
and mental imbecility, or sottish drunkenness. 

God has made the human body to be sustain- 
ed by food and sleep, and the mind to be invi- 
gorated by effort and the regular healthfulness of 
the moral system, and the cheering influence of 
his moral government. And whoever, to sustain 
the body, or invigorate the mind, or cheer the 
heart, applies habitually the stimulus of ardent 
spirits, does violence to the^laws of his nature, 
puts the whole system into disorder, and is in- 
temperate long before the intellect falters, or a 
muscle is unstrung. 

The effect of ardent spirits on the brain, and 
the members of the body, is among the last ef- 
fects of intemperance, and the least destructive 
part of the sin. .It is the moral ruin which it 
works in the soul, that gives it the denomina- 
tion of giant-wickedness. If all who are intem- 
perate, drank to insensibility, and on awaking, 
could a~ise from the debauch with intellect and 
heart uninjured, it would strip the crime of its 
most appalling evils. B'lt among the woes 
which the scriptures der.ounce against crime, one 
is, "wo unto them that are mighty to drink 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 9 

wine, and men of strength to consume strong 
drink." 1 hese are captains in the bands of in- 
temperancj, and will d. ink two generations of 
youths into the grave, before they go to lie down 
by their side. The Lord deliver us from strong- 
ht-aded men, who can move the tongue when 
all are mute around them, and keep the eye 
open when all around them sleep, and can walk 
from the scene of riot, while their companions 
must be aided or wait until the morning. 

It is a matter of undoubted certainty, that 
habitual tippling is \vorse than periodical drunk- 
enness. The poor Indian, who, once a month, 
drinks himself dead all but simple breathing, 
will out-live for years the man who drinks little 
and often, and is not, perhaps, susp 'cted of in- 
temperance. The use of ardent spirits daily, as 
ministering to cheerfulness, or bodily vigor, 
ought to be regarded as intemperance. No per- 
son, probably, ever did, or ever will, receive ar- 
dent spirits into his system once a day, and for- 
tify his constitution against its deleterious effects, 
or exercise such discretion and self govern- 
ment, as tha.t the quantity will not be increas- 
ed, and bodily infirmities and mental imbeci- 
lity be the result, and, in more than hah the 
instances, inebriation. Nature may hold out 
long against this sapping and mining of the con- 
stitution, which daily tippling is carrying on ; 
but, first or last, this foe of life will bring to the 
assault enemies of its own formation, before 



10 ' THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

whose power the feehle and the mighty will be 
alike unable to stand. 

All such occasional exl ilaration of the spirits 
by intoxicating liquors, as produces levity and 
foolish jesting, and the loud laugh, is intempe- 
rance, whether we regard those precepts which 
require us to be sober-minded, or the effect 
which such exhilaration and lightness has upon 
the cause of Christ, when witnessed in profes- 
sors of religion.' The cheerfulness of health, 
and excitement of industry, and social inter- 
course, is all which nature demands, or health 
or purity permits. 

A resort to ardent spirits as a means of in- 
vigorating the intellect, or of pleasurable sensa- 
tion x is also intemperance. It is a distraint 
upon nature, to extort, in a short time, those 
results of mind and feeling, which in her own 
unimpelled course would tlow with less impetu- 
osity, but in a more equable and healthful cur- 
rent. The mind has its limits of intellectual 
application, and the heart its limits of feeling, 
and the nervous system of healthful exhilaration ; 
and whatever you gain through stimulus, by way 
of anticipation, is only so much intellectual and 
vital power cut off <t the latter end of life. It 
is this occult intemperance, of daily drinking, 
which generates a host of bodily infirmities 
and diseases : loss of appetite nausea at the 
stomach disordered bile obstructions of the 
liver jaundice dropsy hoarseness of voice 



Or INTEMPERANCE. 11 

coughs consumptions rheumatic pains epi- 
lepsy gout colic palsy apoplexy insanity 
are the body-guards which attend intempe- 
rance, in the form of tippling, and where the 
odious name of drunkenness may perhaps be 
never applied. 

A multitude of persons, who are not account- 
ed drunkards, create disease, and shorten their 
chiys, by what they denominate a "prudent use 
of ardent spirits." Let it therefore be engraven 
upon the heart of every man, THAT THE DAILY 

USE OF ARDENT SPIRITS, IN ANY FORM, OR IN 
ANY DEGREE, IS INTEMPERANCE. Its effects are 

certain, and deeply injurious, though its results 
may be slow, and never be ascribed to the real 
cause. It is a war upon the human constitution, 
carried on ostensibly by an auxiliary, but which 
never fails to subtract more vital power than it 
imparts. Like the letting out cf M aters by little 
and little, the breach widens, till Jife itself is 
poured out. If all diseases which terminate in 
death, could speak out at the grave, or tell their 
origin upon the coffin-lid, we should witness 
the most appalling and unexpected disclosures. 
Happy the man, who so avoids the appearance 
of evil, as not to shorten his days by what he 
may call the prudent use of ardent points. 

But we approach now a state of experience, 
in which it is supposed generally that there is 
some criminal intemperance. I mean when the 
empire of reason is invaded, and weakness and 
folly bear rule; prompting to garrulity, or sul- 



12 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

len silence ; inspiring petulance, or anger, or 
insipid good humo:ir, and silly conversation ; 
pouring out oaths, and curses, or opening the 
storehouse 1 of secrets, their own and others. 
And yet, by some, all these have been thought 
insufficient evidence to support the charge, of 
drinking, and to justify a process of di' t>line 
before the church. , The tongue must talter, and 
the feet must trip, before, in the estimation of 
some, professors of religion can be convicted of 
the crime cf intemperance. 

To a just and comprehensive knowledge, how- 
,ever, of the crime of intemperance, not only a 
definition is required, but a philosophical analy- 
sis of its mechanical effects upon the animal 
system. 

To those who look only on the outward ap- 
pearance, the triumphs of intemperance over 
conscience, and taients, and learning, and cha- 
racter, and interest, and family endearments, 
have appeared wonderuil. But the wonder will 
cease, when we consider the raging desire which 
it enkindles, and the hand of torment which it 
lays, on every fibre of the body and faculty of 
the soul. 

The stomach is the great organ of accelerated 
circulation to the blood, of elasticity to the ani- 
mal spirits, of pleasurable or paimul vibration to 
the nerves, of vigor to the mind, and of ful- 
ness to the cheerful affections of the soul. Here 
is the silver cord of life, and the golden bowl at 
the fountain, and the wheel at the cistern ; and 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 13 

as fhese fulfil their duty, the muscular and men- 
tal and moral powers act in unison, and fill the 
system with vigor and delight. But as these 
central energies are enfeebled, the strength of 
mind ind body declines, and lassitude, and de- 
pression, and melancholy, and sighing, succeed 
to the high beatings of health, and the light ol 
life becomes as darkness. 

Experience has decided, 'that any stimulus 
applied statedly to the stomach, v/hich raises its 
muscular tone aHove the point at which it can be 
sustained, by food and sleep, produces, when it 
has passed away, debility a relaxation of the 
over-wcrked organ, proportioned to its preter- 
natural excitement The life-giving power of 
the stomach falls of course as much below the 
tone of cheerfulness and health, as it was injudi- 
ciously raised above it. If the experiment be 
repeated often, it produces an artificial tone of 
stomach, essential to cheerfulness and muscular 
vigor, entirely above the power of the regular 
sustenance of nature to sustain,, and creates a 
vacuum, which nothing ean fill, but the destruc- 
tive power which made it and when protracted 
use ha? made the difference great, between the 
natural and this artificial tone, and habit has 
made it a second nature, the man is a drunkard, 
and, in ninety-nine instances in a hundred, is 
irretrievably undone. Whether his tongue fal- 
ter, or his feet fail him or not, he will die of 
intemperance. By whatever name his disease 
may be called, it will be one of the legion which 
2 



14 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

lie in wait about the path of intemperance, and 
which abused Heaven employs to execute wrr.th 
upon the guilty. 

But of all the ways to hell, which the feet of 
deluded mortals tread, that of the intenrperate 
is the most dreary and terrific. The demand 
for artificial stimulus to supply the deficiencies' 
of healthful aliment, is like the rage of thirst, and 
the ravenous demand of famine. It is famine : 
for the artificial excitement has become as es- 
sential now to strength and cheerfulness, as 
simple nutrition once was. But nature, taught 
by habit to require what once she did not need, 
demands gratification JIOAV with a decision inexo- 
rable as death, and to most men as irresistible. 
The denial is a living death. . The stomach, the 
head, the heart, and arteries, and veins, and 
every muscle, and every nerve, feel the exhaus- 
tion, and the restless, unutterable wretchedness 
which puts out the light of life, and curtains the 
heavens, and carpets the earth with sackcloth. 
All these varieties of sinking nature^ call upon 
the wretched man with trumpet tongue, to dis- 
pel this darkness, and raise the ebbing tide of 
life, by the application of the cause which pro- 
duced these woes, and^after a momentary allevia- 
tion will produce them again with deeper ter- 
rors, and more urgent importunity ; for the re- 
petition, at each time renders the darkness 
deeper, and the torments of self-denial more 
irresistible and intolerable. 

At length, the excitability of nature flags, and 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 16 

stimulants of higher power, and in greater quan- 
tities, are required to rouse the impaired ener- 
gies of life, until at length the whole process 
of dilatory murder, and worse than purgatoria 1 
suffering, having been passed over, the silver 
cord is loosed, the golden bowl is broken, the 
wheel at the cistern stops, an -I the dust returns 
to the earth as it was, and the spirit to God who 
gave it. 

These sufferings, however, of animal nature, 
are not to be compared with the moral agonies 
which convulse the soul. It is an immortal 
being who sins, and suffers ; and as his earthly 
house dissolves, he is approaching the judg-nent 
seat, in anticipation of a miserable eternity. 
He feels his captivity, and in anguish of spirit 
clanks his chains and cries for help. Conscience 
thunders, remorse goads, and as the gulf opens 
before him, he recoils, and trembles, and weeps, 
and prays, and resolves, and promises^ and re- 
forms, and "seeks it yet again," again re- 
solves, and v weeps, and prays, and " seeks it yet 
ag".in !" Wretched man, he has placed himself 
in the hands of a giant, who never pities, and 
never relaxes his iron gripe. He may struggle, 
but he is in chains. He may cry for release, 
but it comes not ; and lost ! lost ! may be in- 
sc.ibed upon the door posts of his dwelling. 

In the mean time these paroxysms of his dying 
moral nature decline, n id a fearful apathy, the 
harbinger of spiritual death, comes on. His 
resolution fails, and his mental energy, and his 



16 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

vigorous enterprise ; and nervous irritation and 
depression ensue. The social affections lose 
their fulness and tenderness, and cor science 
loses its power, end the heart its sensibility, 
until all that was once lovely and of good report, 
retires and leaves {he wretch abandoned to the 
appetites of a ruined animal. In this deplora- 
ble condition, reputation expires, business fal- 
ters and becomes perplexed, and temptations to 
drink multiply as inclination to do so increases, 
and the power of resistance declines. And 
now the vortex roars, and the struggling victim 
buffets the fiery wave with feebler stroke, and 
warning supplication, until despair flashes upon 
his Foul, and with an outcry that pierces the 
heavens, he ceases to strive, and disappears. 

A sin so terrific should be detected in its 
origin and strangled in the cradle ; but ordina- 
rily, instead of this, the habit is fix?d, and the 
hope of reformation is gone, before the subject 
has the least suspicion of danger. It is of vast 
importance therefore, tluvt the various ocpasions 
of intemperance should be clearly described, 
that those whose condition is not irretrievable, 
may perceive their danger, and escape, and that 
all who are free, may be warned off from these 
places of temptation and ruin. For the benefit 
of the young, especially,'! propose to lay down 
a map of the way to destruction, and * rear a 
monument of warning -non every spu t where 
a wayfaring man has been encaared and de- 
stroyed. 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 17 

The first occasion of intemperance which I 
shall mention, is found in the free and frequent 
use of ardent spirits in the family, as an^incen 
tiv% to appetite, an alleviation of lassitude', or an 
excitement to cheerfulness. In these reiterated 
indulgences, children are allowed to partake, 
and the tender organs of their stomachs are 
early perverted, and predisposed to habits of 
intemperance. No family, it is believed, accus- 
tomed to the daily use of ardent spirits, ever 
failed to plant the seeds of that dreadful disease, 
which sooner or later produced a harvest of wo. 
The material of so much temptation and mis- 
chief, ought not to be allowed a place in the 
family, except only as ' a medicine, and 'even 
then it would be safer in the hands of the 
apothecary, to be sent for like other medicine, 
when prescribed. 

Ardent spirits, given as a matter of hospitali- 
ty, is not unfrequently the -occasion of intempe- 
rance. In this case the temptation is a stated 
inmate of the family. The utensils are present, 
and the occasions for their use are not unfre- 
quent. And when there is no guest, the sight 
of the liquor, the state of the health, or even 
lassitude of spirits, may indicate the p'ropriety of 
the " prudent use," until the prudent use be- 
comes, by repetition, habitual use and habitual 
use becomes irreclaimable intemperance. In 
this manner, doubtless, has many a father, and 
mother, and son, and daughter, beea ruined 
forever. 

2* 



18 THE NATURE 'AND OCCASIONS 

Of the guests, also, who partake in this family 
hospitality, the number is not small, who be- 
com<* ensnared; especially among those whose 
profession calls them to visit families often, and 
many on the same day. Instead of being re- 
garded, therefore, as an act of hospitality, and 
a token of friendship, to invite our friends to 
drink, it ought to be regarded as an act of in- 
civility, to place ourselves and them in circum- 
stances of such high temptation. 

Days of public convocation are extensively 
the occasions of excess which eventuate in in 
temperance. The means and temptations are 
ostentatiously multiplied, and multitudes go forth 
prepared and resolved to yield to temptation, 
while example and exhilarated feeling secure 
the ample fulfilment of their purpose. But 
when the habit is once acquired of drinking 
even " prudently," as it will be called, on all the 
days of public convocation which occur in a 
year, a desire will be soon formed of drinking at 
other times, until the healthful appetite of nature 
is superseded by the artificial thirst produced by 
ardent spirits. 

Evening resorts for conversation, enlivened by 
the cheering bowl, have proved fatal to thou- 
sands. Though nothing should be boisterous, 
and all should seem only the " feast of reason, 
and the flow of soul," yet at the latter end it 
biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder : 
many a wretched man has shaken his chains 
and cried out in the anguish of his spirit, oh ! 



OP INTEMl'ERAM E. 19 

that accursed resort ol social drinking ; theremy 
> bands were bound and my feet put in fetters ; 
there I went a freeman and became a slave,- a 
temperate man and became a drunkard. - 

In the same class of high temptation are to be 
ranked all convivial associations for the purpose 
of drinking, with or without gambling, and late 
hours. There is nothing uhich young men of 
spirit feai less, thin the exhilaration of drinking 
on such occasions , nor any thing which they 
fire, less able to resist, than the charge of cow- 
ardice when challenged to drink. But there id 
no one form of temptation before which moie 
young men of promise have fallen into irretriev- 
able ruin. The connexion between sucL begin- 
nings and a fatal e:id is so manifest, and the 
presumptuous daring of Heaven is so great, that 
God in his righteous displeasure is accustomed 
to withdraw his protection and abandon the 
sinner tft his own way. 

Feeble health and mental depression ar a *o be 
lAimbered among the occasions of intemperance. 
The vital sinking, and muscular debility, and 
mental darkness, are for a short time alleviated 
by the application of stimulants. But the cause 
of this momentary alleviation i? applied and re- 
peated, until the habit of excessive drinking is 
formed find has become irresistible. 

Medical prescriptions have no doubt contri- 
buted to increase the number of the intempe- 
rate. Ardent spirits, administered in the form 
of bitters, or as tbe medium of other medicine, 



20 THB NATURE ANI> OCCASIONS 

have let in the destroyer ; and while the patient 
was seeking health at the hand of the physician, 
HE was dealing out debility and death. 

The distillation of ardent spirits fails not to 
raise up around the establishment a generation 
of drunkards. The cheapness of the article, 
and the ease with which families can provide 
themselves with large quantities, the nroJuct of 
their own labor, eventuate in frequent drinking, 
and wide spread intemperance. 

The vending of ardent spirits, in places licen 
sed or unlicensed, is a tremendous evil. Here, 
those who have no stated employment loiter 
away the day for a few potations of rum, and 
here, those who have finished the toils of the 
day meet to spend a vacant hour ; none content 
to be lookers on : all drink, and none for any 
length of time drink temperately. Here too the 
children of a neighborhood, drawn in by entice- 
ments, associate for social drinking, and the 
exhibition of courage and premature manhood. 
And here the iron hand of the monster is fas- 
tened upon them, at a period when they ought 
not to have been beyond the reach of maternal 
observation. 

The continued habit of dealing out ardent 
spirits, in various forms and mixtures, leads also 
to frequent tasting, and tasting to drinking, and 
drinking to tippling, and tippling to drunken- 
ness. 

A resort to ardent spirits as an alleviation of 
trouble, results often in habits of confirmed in- 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 21 

temperance. The loss of friends, perplexities 
of business, or the wreck of property, bring 
upon the spirits rhe distractions of caie and the 
pressure of sorrow ; and, instead of casting their 
cares jpou the Lord, they resort to the exhilarat- 
ing draught, but, before the occasion for it has 
ceased, the remedy itself has become a calami- 
ty more intolerable than the disease. Before, 
the woes were temporary; now, they have mul- 
tiplied and have become eternal. 

Ardent spirits employed to invigorate the in- 
tellect, or restore exhausted nature under severe 
study, is often a fatal experiment. Mighty men 
have been cast down in this manner never to 
rise. The quickened circulation does for a time 
.invigorate intellect and restore exhausted na- 
ture. But, for the adventitious energy imparted, 
it exhausts the native energy of the soul, and 
incaces that faintncss of heart, and flagging of 
the spiiits, which cry incessantly, "give, give," 
and never, but with expiring breath, say it is 
enough. 

The use of ardent spirits, employed as an 
auxiliary to labor, is among the most fatal, be- 
cause the most common and least suspected, 
causes of intemperance: It is justified as inno- 
cent, it is insisted on as necessary : but no fact 
is more completely established by experience 
than th>i it is utterly useless, and ultimately in- 
jurious, beside all the fearful evils of habitual in- 
temperance, to which it so often leads. THERE 

IS NO NUTRITION IN ARDENT SPIRIT. ALL THAT 



22 THE NATURE AND OCCASIONS 

IT DCES IS, TO CONCENTRATE THE STRENGTH OF 
THE SYSTEM FOR THE TIME, BEYOND ITS CA- 
PACITY FOR. JIEGULAR EXERTION. It Is boiTOwing 

strength for aw occasion, which will be needed 
foi 1 futurity, without any provision ibr payment, 
and with the certainty of ultimate bankruptcy. 

The early settlers of New-England endured 
more hardship, and performed more labor, and 
carried through life more health and vigor, than 
appertains to the existing generation of labor- 
ing men. And they did it without the use of 
ardent spirits. 

Let two men, of equal age and firmness of 
constitution, labor together through the sum- 
mer, the one wiih and the other without the ex- 
citement of ardent spirits, and the latter will 
come out at the end with unimpaired vigor, 
while the other will be comparatively exhausted. 
Ships navigated as some now are without ihe 
habitual use of ardent spirits and maLufactur- 
ing establishments carried on without and ex- 
tended agricultural operations all move on with 
better industry, more peace, more health, and a 
better income to the employers and the employ- 
ed. The workmen are cheerful and vigorous, 
friendly and industrious, and their families are 
thrif'y, \vell fed, well clothed and instructed ; 
and instead of distress and poverty, and dis- 
appointment and contention they an* heered 
with the full flow of social affection, and often by 
the sustaining power of religion. But where ar- 
dent spirit is received as a tlaily auxiliary to la- 



F INTEMPERANCE. 28 

bor, it is commonly taken at stated times the 
habit soon creates a vacancy in the stomach, 
which indicates at length the hour of the day 
with as much accuracy as a clock. It will be 
taken besides, fr^quciidy, at other times which 
will accelerate the destruction of nature's health- 
ful tone, create artificial debility, and the neces- 
sity of artificial excitement to remove it; and 
when so much has been consumed as the eco- 
nomy of the employer can allow, the growing de- 
mand will be supplied by the evening and morn- 
ing dram, from the wages of labor until the 
appetite has become insatiable, and the habit of 
intemperance nearly universal until the nervous 
excitability has obliterated the social sensibilities, 
and turned the family into a' scene of babbling 
and wo until voracious appetite has eaten up 
the children's bread, and abandoned them to ig- 
norance and crime until conscience has become 
callous, and fidelity and industry have disappear- 
ed, except as the result of eye service ; and wan- 
ton wastefulness and contention, and reckless 
wretchedness characterize the establishmeut 



SERMON II. 



THE SIGNS OF INTEMPERANCE. 



1'uovERBS, xxiii. 29--S5. 

V o hath wo ' who hath sorrow ? who Iiatli contentions f wliu 
li.iu adMini!? who hath wounds without cause.' who hath red- 
nesi >! i 

l v . ey that tarry long at the wjie ; they that go to seek mixed 
wiii-<. 

Look not Ihon 11(11.11 the wine when it is red, when it giveth his 
roli'iir in tin- cup, wli.Mi it inovetli itself aright. At the last it 
niu-th like ti serpent, ai;d stiiitfeth like an- adder. Thine eye shall 
bt-li.ilil siraum- women, and th'iie heart shall utter perverse things. 
Yt-a, tin MI shalt be as he that lietb down in the midst of the sea, 
or as ho that lieth upon the top of a mast. They have stricken 
UK', shall thou say, and I was not sick ; they have beaten me, and 
I felt it not : when shall I awake ? 1 will seek it yet again. 

IN the preceding discourse I considered the 
nature and occasions of intemperance. In this 
1 shall disclose some of the symptoms of this 
fearful malady, as they affect both the body and 
the mind, that every one, who is in any degree 
addicted to the sin, may be apprised of his dan- 
ger, and save himself before it be too late. 

In the early stages of intemperance reforma- 
tion is practicable. The calamity is, that intem- 
perance is a sin so deceitful, that most men go 
3 



26 THE SIGNS 

on to irretrievable ruin, warned indeed by many 
indications, but unavailing!]*, because they un- 
derstand not their ( voice. 

It is of vast importance, tberefore, that the 
symptoms of intemperance should be universally 
and familiarly known ; the efl'ects of the sin 
upon the body, and upon the mind, should be 
so described in all its stages, from .the begin- 
ning to the end, that every one may see, and 
feel, and recognise these harbingers of death 
as soon as they begin to show themselves upon 
him. 

1. One of the early indications of intempe- 
rance may be found in the associations of time 
and place. 

In the commencement of this evil habit, there 
are many who drink to excess only on particular 
days, such as days for military exhibition, the 
anniversary of our independence, the birth-day 
of Washington, Christmas, new year's day, 
election, and others of the like nature. When 
any of these holidays arrive, and they come as 
often almost as saints' days in the calendar, 
they bring with them, to many, the insatiable 
desire of drinking, as well AS a dispensation 
from the sin, as efficadious and quieting to the 
conscience, as papal indulgences. 

There are "some I am aware that have recom- 
mended the multiplication of holidays and public 
amusements, as a remedy for intemperance : 
about as wise a prescription as the multiplying 
gambling houses to supersede gambling, or the 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 27 

building of theatres to correct the evils of the 

stage. 

There arc others who feel the desire of drink- 
ing stirred up within them by the associations 
of place. They could go from end to end of a 
day's journey witho-:* ardent spirits, were there 
no taverns on the road. But the very sight of 
these receptacles of pilgrims awakens the desire 
"just to step in and take something." And so 
powerful docs this association become, that many 
will no more pass the tavern than they would 
pass a fortified place with all the engines of 
death directed against them. There are in every 
city, town, and village, places of resort, which in 
like manner, as soon as the eye falls upon them, 
cieate the thirst of drinking, and many, who, 
coming to market or on business, pass near 
them, pay toll there as regularly as they do at 
the gates ; and sometimes both when they come 
in and when they go out. In cities and their 
suburbs, there are hundreds of shops at which a 
large proportion of those who bring in produce 
slop regularly to receive the customary beverage. 

In every community , you may observe par- 
tkular persons also who can never meet without 
feeling the simultaneous desire of strong drink. 
What can be the reason of this? All men, 
when they meet, are not affected thus. It is not 
uncommon for m a ,n of similar employments to 
be drawn by association, when they meet, to the 
same topics of conversation : physicians, upon 
the concerns of their profession : politicians, 



28 THE SIGNS 

upon the events of the day : and Christians, 
when they meet, are drawn hy a common inte- 
rest to speak of the things of the kingdom of 
God. But this is upon the principle of a com- 
mon interest in tLese subjects, which has no 
slight hold upon the thoughts and affections. 
Whoever then finds himself tempted on meeting 
his companion or friend to say, ' come and let 
us go and take something,' or, to make it his 
first business to set out his decanter and glasses, 
ought to understand that he discloses his own 
inordinate attachment to ardent spirits, and ac- 
cuses his friend of intemperance. 

2. A disposition to multiply the circumstances 
which furnish the occasions and opportunities 
for drinking, may justly create alarm that the 
habit is begun. When you find occasions for 
drinking in all the variations of the weather, 
because it is so hot or so cold so wet or so 
dry and in all the different states of the sys- 
tem when you are vigorous, that you need not 
tire and when tired, that your vigor may be 
restored, you have approached near to that state 
of intemperance in which you will drink in all 
states of the weather, and conditions of the 
body, and will drink with these pretexts, and 
drink without them whenever their frequency 
may not suffice. In like manner if, on your 
farm, or in your store, or workshop, or on board 
your vessel, you love to multiply the catches and 
occasions of drinking, in the forms of treats for 
new comers for mistakes for new articles of 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 29 

dress or furniture until in some places a man 
can scarcely wear an article of dress, or receive 
one of equipage or furniture, \\ Inch has not been 
"wet," you may rely on it that all these usirges, 
and rules, and laws, are devices -to gratify an 
inordinate and dangerous love of strong drink; 
and though the master of the shop should not 
himself come down to such little measures, yet 
if he permits such things to be done, if he hears, 
and sees, and smiles, and sometimes sips a little 
of the forfeited beverage, his heart is in the 
thing, and he is under the influence of a danger-* 
ous love of that hilarity which is produced by 
strong drink. 

3. Whoever finds the desire of drinking ar- 
dent spirits returning daily at stated times, is 
warned to deny himself instantly, if he intends 
to escape confirmed intemperance. 

It is infallible evidence that you have already 
done violence to nature that the undermining 
process is begun that the over- worked organ 
begins Jo flag, and cry out for adventitious aid, 
with an importunity which, if indulged, will be- 
. come more deep toned, and importunate, and 
irresistible, until the power of self-denial is 
gone, and you ate a ruined man. It is the vor- 
tex begun, which, if not checked, will become 
more capacious, and deep, and powerful, and 
loud, until the interests of time and eternity are 
engulfed. 

It is here then beside this commencing vor- 
tex that I would take my stand, to warn off 
3* 



30 . THE" SIGNS 

the heedless navigator from destruction. To all 
who do but heave in sight, and with voice that 
should rise above the winds and waves, I would 
cry " stand off! ! !" spread the sail, ply the 
oar, for death is here and could I command 
the elements the blackness of darkness should 
gather over this gate-way to hell and loud 
thunders should utter their voices and lurid 
fires should blaze and the groans of unearthly 
voices should be heard inspiring consternation 
and flight in all who came near. For this is the 
parting point between those who forsake danger 
and hide themselves, and the foolish who pass on 
and are punished. He who escapes this period- 
ical thirst of times and seasons, will not be a 
drunkard, as he who comes .within the reach of 
this powerful attraction will be sure to perish. It 
may not be certain that every one will become a 
sot ; but it is certain that every one will enfeeble 
his body, generate disease, and shorten his days. 
It may not be certain that every one will sacrifice 
his reputation, or squander his property, and die 
in the alms house ; but it is certain that a large 
proportion will come to poverty and infaniy, of 
those who yield daily to the periodical appetite 
for ardent spirits. Here is the. stopping place, 
and though beyond it men may struggle, and 
retard, and modify their progress, none, com- 
paratively, who go by it, will return again to 
purity of enjoyment, and the sweets of temperate 
liberty. The servant has become the master, 
and, with a rod of iron and a whip of scorpions, 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 31 

he will torment, even before their time, the can- 
didates for misery in a future state. 

4. Another sign of intemperance may be 
found in the desire of concealment. When a 
man finds himself disposed to drink oftener, and 
more than he is willing to do before his family 
and the world, and begins to drink slily and in 
secret places, he betrays a consciousness that he 
is disposed to drink more than to others will ap- 
pear safe and proper, and what he suspects others 
may think, he ought to suppose they have cause 
to think, and reform instantly. For now he has 
arrived at a period in the history of intempe- 
rance, where, if he does not stop, he will hasten 
on to ruin with accelerated movement. So long 
as the eye of friendship and a regard to pub- 
lic observation kept him within limits, there 
was some hope of reformation ; but when he 
cuts this last cord, and launches out alone with 
his boat and bottle, he has committed himself to 
mountain waves and furious winds, and probably 
will never return. 

5. When a man allows himself to drink al- 
ways in company so much as he may think he 
can bear without awakening in others the suspi- 
cion of inebriation, he will deceive himself, and 
no one beside. For abused nature herself will 
publish the excess in the bloated countenance, 
and flushed visage, and tainted breath, and in- 
flamed e.ye ; and were all these banners of in- 
temperance struck, the man with his own tongue 
will reveal his shame. At first there will be 



32 THE SIGNS 

something strange in his appearance or conduct, 
to awaken observation, and induce scrutiny, 
until <xt length, with all his carefulness, in some 
unguarded moment he will take more than he 
can bear. And now the secret is out, and these 
unaccountable things are explained ; these ex- 
posures v (1 become more frequent, the unhappy 
man still dreaming that though he erred a little, 
he took such good care to conceal it, that no 
one knew it but himself. He will even talk 
when his tongue is palsied, to ward off suspicion, 
and thrust himself into company, to show that 
he is not drunk. 

6. Those persons who find themselves for 
some cause always irritated when efforts are 
made to suppress intemperance, and moved by 
some instinctive impulse to make opposition, 
ought to examine instantly whether the love of 
ardent spirits is not the cause of it. 

Au aged country merchant, of an acute mind 
and sterling reputation, once suid to me, " I 
never knew an attempt made to suppress intem- 
perance, which was not opposed by some per- 
sons, from whom I should not have expected 
opposition } and I never failed to find, first or 
last, that these persons were themselves impli- 
cated -in the sin." Temperate men seldom if 
ever oppose the-reformation of intempeiance. 

7. We now approach some "tf those symp- 
toms of intemperance which abused nature first 
or last never fails to give. 

The eyes. Who hath redness of eyes ? All 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 38 

are not of course intemperate whose visual or- 
gans become inflamed and weak. But there are 
few intemperate persons who escape this malady, 
and yet when it comes, they have no suspicion 
of the cause speak of it without embarrassment 
and wonder what the matter can be apply to 
the physician for eye water, and drink on. But 
every man who is accustomed to drink ardent 
spirits freely, whose eye begins to redden and to 
weep, ought to know what the matter is, and to 
take warning ; it is one of the signals which dis- 
tressed nature holds out and waves in token of 
distress. 

Another indication of intemperance is found 
in the fulness and redness of the countenance. 
It is not the fulness and freshness of health but 
rather the plethora of a relaxed fibre and peccant 
humours, which come to occupy the vacancy of 
healthful nutrition, and to mar the countenance 
with pimples and inflammation. All are not in- 
temperate of course who are affected with dis- 
eases of the skin. But no hard drinker carries 
such a face without a guilty and specific cause, 
and it is another signal of distress which abused 
nature holds out, while she cries for help. 

Another indication of intemperance may be 
found in impaired muscular strength and tremour 
of the hand. Now the destroyer, in his mining 
process, approaches the citadel of life, and is ad- 
vancing fast to make the keepers of the house 
tremble, and the strong men bow themselves. 
This relaxation of the joints, and trembling of the 



34 THE SIGNS 

nerves, will be experienced especially in the 
morning when the system, unsustained by 
sleep, has run down. Now all is relaxed, trem- 
ulous, and faint-hearted. The the which spar- 
kled in the eye, the evening before, is quenched 
the courage which dilated the heart is passed 
away and Ihe tones of eloquence, which dwelt 
on the inspired tongue, are turned into pusillani- 
mous complainings, until opium, or bitters, or 
both, are thrown into the stomach to wind up 
again the run-down machine. 

And now the liver, steeped in fire, begins to 
contract, and refuses to perform its functions, in 
preparing the secretions which are necessary to 
aid digestion ; and loss of appetite ensues; and 
indigestion, and fermentation, and acidity, begin 
to rob the system of nutrition, and to vex and 
irritate the vital organ, filling the stomach with 
air, and the head with fumes, and the soul with 
darkness and terror. 

This reiterated irritation extends by sympathy 
to the lungs, which become inflamed and lace- 
rated, until hemorrhage ensues. And now the 
terrified victim hastens to the physician to stay 
the progress of >a consumption, which intempe- 
rance has begun, and which medical treatment, 
while the cause continues, cannot arrest. 

About this time the fumes of the scalding 
furnace below begin to lacerate the throat, and 
blister the tongue and the lip. Here again the 
physician is called in to ease these torments ; but 
until the fires beneath are extinct, what can the 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 35 

physician do ? He can no more alleviate these 
woes than he can carry alleviation to the tor- 
mented, in the Humes for which these are the 
sad preparations. 

Another indication of intemperance is irrita- 
bility, petulance, and violent anger. The great 
organ of nervous sensibility has been brought 
into a state of tremulous excitement. The slight- 
est touch causes painful vibrations, and irri- 
. tations, which defy self-government. The tem- 
per becomes like the flash of powder, or un- 
governable and violent as the helm driven hither 
and thither by raging winds, and mountain 
wa\ 

Another indication of intemperance is to be 
found in the extinction of all the finer feelings 
and amiable dispositions of the soul; and, if 
there have ever seemed to be religious affections, 
of these also. The fiery stimulus has raised the 
organ of sensibility above the power of excite- 
ment by motives addressed to the finer feelings 
of the soul, and of the moral nature, and left the 
man a prey to animal sensation. You might as 
well fling out music upon the whirlwind to stay 
its course, as to govern the storm within by the 
gentler feelings of humanity. The only stimu- 
lant which now has power to move, is ardent 
spirits and he who has arrived at this condition 
is lost. He has left far behind the wreck of 
what he once was. He is not the same husband, 
or father, or brother, or friend. The sea has 
made a clear breach over him, and swept away 



36 THE SIGNS 

forever whatsoever things are pure, and lovely, 
and of good report. 

And as to religion, if he ever seemed to have 
any, all such affections declined as the emotions 
of artificial stimulants arose, until conscience has 
lost its power, or survives only with vulture 
scream to flap the wing, and terrify the soul. His 
religious affections are dead when he is sober, and 
rise only to emotion and loquacity and tears when 
he is drank. Dead, twice dead, is he whatever 
may have been the hopes he once indulged, or 
the evidence he once gave, or the hopes he once 
inspired. For drunkards, no more than mur- 
derers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 

As the disease makes progress, rheumatic 
pains diffuse themselves throughout the system. 
The man wonders what can be the reason that 
he should be visited by such a complication of 
disease, and again betakes himself to the physi- 
cian, and tries every remedy but the simple one 
of temperance. For these pains are only the 
murmurings and 'complainings of nature, through 
all the system giving signs of wo, that all is lost. 
For to rheumatic pains ensues a debility of the 
system, which becoming unable to sustain the 
circulation, the fluids fall first upon the feet, 
and, as the deluge rises, the chest is invaded, and 
the breath is shortened, until by a sudden inunda- 
tion it is stopped. Or, if in this form death is 
avoided, it is only to be met in another more 
dilatory but no less terrific ; for now comes on 
the last catastrophe the sudden prostration of 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 37 

strength and appetite an increased difficulty of 
raising the ebbing tide of life by stimulants a 
few panic struck reformations, just on the sides 
of the pit, until the last sinking comes, from 
which there is no resurrection but by the trump 
of God, and at the judgment day. 

And now the woes, and the sorrows, and the 
contentions, and the wounds, and babblings, are 
over the red eye sleeps the tortured body 
rests the deformed visage is hid from human 
observation and the soul, while the dust crum- 
bles back to dust, returns to God who gave it, to 
receive according to the deeds done in the body. 

Such is the evil which demands a remedy. 
And what can be done to stop its lavages and 
rescue its victims ? 

This is not the place to say all that belongs 
to this part of the subject, but we cannot close 
without saying by anticipation a few things here; 
and, 

1. There should be extended through the 
community an all-p ervading sense of the danger 
there is of falling into this sin. Intemperance is 
a disease as well as a crime, and were any other 
disease, as contagious, of as marked symptoms, 
and as mortal, to pervade the land, it would 
create universal consternation : for the plague is 
scarcely more contagious or deadly ; and yet we 
mingle fearlessly with the diseased, and in spite 
of admonition we bring into our dwellings the 
contagion, apply it to the lip, and receive it into 
the system. 

4 



38 THE SIGNS 

I know that much is said about the prudent 
use of ardent spirits ; but we might as well 
speak of the prudent use of the plague of fire 
handed prudently around among powder of 
poison taken prudently every day or of vipers 
and serpents iiuroduced prudently into our dwel- 
lings, io glide about as a matter of courtesy to 
visitors, and of amusement to our children. 

First or last, in spite of your prudence, the 
contagion will take the fatal spark will fall 
upon the train the deleterious poison will tell 
upon the system and the fangs of the serpent 
will inllict death. There is no prudent use of 
ardent spirits, but when it is used as a medicine. 
All who receive it into the system are not de- 
stroyed by it. But if any, vegetable were poi- 
sonous to as many, as the use of ardent spirits 
proves destructive, it would be banished from 
the table ; it would not be prudent to use it at all. 
If in attempting to cross a river upon an elastic 
beam as many should fall in and be drowned, 
as attempt to use ardent spirits prudently and 
r ail, the attempt to cross in that way would be 
abandoned there would be no prudent use of 
that mode of crossing. The effect of attempting 
to use ardent spirits prudently, is destructive to 
feach multitudes, as precludes the possibility of 
prudence in tlie use of it. When we consider 
the deceitful nature of this sin, and its irresistible 
poxver when it has obtained an ascendency no 
man can use it prudently or without mocking 
God can pray while he uses it, " lead us not into 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 39 

temptation." There is no necessity for using it 
at all, and it is presumptuous to Jo so. 

2. A wakeful recollection should be maintain- 
ed of the distinction between intemperance and 
drunkenness. So long as men suppose that there 
is neither crime nor danger in drinking, short of 
what they denominate drunkenness, they will 
cast off fear and move onward to ruin by a silent, 
certain course, until destruction comes upon 
them, and they cannot escape.. It should be 
known therefore and admitted, that to drink dai- 
ly, at stated times, any quantity of ardent spirits, 
is intemperance, or to drink periodically as often 
as days, and times, and seasons, may funush 
temptation and opportunity, is intemperance. It 
may not be for any one time the intemperance 
of animal or mental excitement, but it is an in 
novation upon the system, and the beginning of 
a habit, which cannot fail to generate disease, 
and will not be pursued by one hundred men 
without producing many drunkards. 

It is not enough therefore to erect the flag 
ahead, to mark the spot where the drunkard dies. 
It must be planted at the entrance cf his course, 
proclaiming in waving capitals THIS is THE 
WAV TO DEATH ! ! Over the whole territory of 
" prudent use," it must wave and warn. For if 
we cannot stop men in the beginning, we cannot 
separate between that and the end. He who 
lets ardent spirits alone before it -is meddled 
with, is safe, and he only. It should be in every 
family a contraband article, or if it is admitted, 



40 THE SIGNS 

it should be allowed for medical purposes only. 
It should be labelled as we label laudanum and 

TOUCH NOT, TASTE NOT, HANDLE NOT, should 

me^t the eye on every vessel which contains it. 

Children should be taught early the nature, 
symptoms, and danger of this sin, that they may 
not unwittingly fall under its power. To save 
my own children from this sin has been no small 
part of my solicitude as a parent, and I can 
truly say, that should any of my children perish 
in this way, they will not do it ignorantly, nor 
unearned. I do not remember that I ever gave 
permission to a child to go out on a holiday, or 
gave a pittance of money to be expended for his 
gratification, unattended by the earnest injunc- 
tion, not to drink ardent spirits, or any in"briat- 
ing liquor; and I. cannot but believe, that if 
proper exertions are made in the family to ap- 
prise children of the nature and danger of this 
sin, and to put them on their guard against it 
opinions and feelings and habits might be so 
formed,. that the whole youthful generation might 
rise up as a rampart, against which the fiery 
waves of intemperance would dash in vain, 
saying, hitherto shalt thou come, but r- farther, 
and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. To 
all our schools instruction on this subject should 
be communicated, and the Sabbath schools now 
spreading through the land, may in this manner 
lend a mighty influence to prevent the intempe- 
rance of the rising generation. 

In respect to the reformation of those over 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 41 

whom the habit of intemperance has obtained an 
ascendency, there is but one: alternative they 
must resolve upon immediate and entire absti- 
nence. 

Some have recommended, and many have at- 
tempted, a gradual discontinuance. But no man's 
jmulfiice and fortitude are equal to the task of 
reformation in this way. If the patient were in 
close confinement, where he could not help him- 
self, he might be dealt with in this manner, but 
it would bi: cruelly protracting a course of suffer- 
ing through months, which might be ended in a 
few days. But no man, at liberty, will reform 
by gradual retrenchment. Substitutes" have also 
been recommended as the means of reformation, 
such as opium, which is only another mode of 
producing inebriation, is often a temptation to 
intemperance, and not ^infrequently unites its 
own forces with those of ardent spirits to impair 
health, and destroy life. It is a preternatural 
stimulant, raising excitement above the tone- of 
health, and predisposing the system for intem- 
perate drinking. , 

Strong beer has been recommended as a sub- 
stitute for ardent spirits, and a means of leading 
back the captive to health and liberty. But 
though it may not create intemperate habits as 
soon, it has no power to allay them. It will 
finish even what ardent spirits have begun and 
with this difference only, that it doer; not rasp 
the vita! organs with quite so keen a fne and 
enables the victim to come down to his grave, by 
4* 



42 THE SIGNS 

a course somewhat more dilatory, and with more 
of the good natured stupidity of the idiot, and 
less of the demoniac frenzy of the madman. 

Wine has been prescribed as a means of de- 
coying the intemperate from the ways of death. 
But habit cannot be thus cheated put of its do- 
minion, nor ravening appetite be amused down 
to a sober and temperate demand. If it be true 
that men do not become intemperate on wine, it 
is not true that wine will restore the intempe- 
rate, or stay the progress of the disease. Enough 
must be taken to screw up nature to the tone oi 
cheerfulness, or she will cry " give," with an 
importunity not to be resisted, and long before 
the work of death is done, wine will fail to min- 
ister a stimulus of sufficient, activity to rouse 
the flagging spirits, or will become acid on the 
enfeebled stomach, and brandy and opium will 
be called in to hasten to its consummation the 
dilatory work of self-destruction. So that if no 
man becomes a sot upon wine, it is only because 
it hands him over to more fierce and terrible 
executioners of Heaven's delayed vengeance. 

If in any instance wine suffices to complete 
the work of ruin, then the difference is only that 
the victim is stretched longer upon the rack, 
to die in torture with the gout, while ardent 
spirits finish life by a shorter and perhaps less 
painful course. 

Retrenchments and substitutes then are idle, 
and if in any case they succeed, it is not in one 
of a thousand. It is the tampering of an infant 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 43 

with a giant, the effort of a kitten to escape 
fiom the paw of a lion. 

There is no remedy for intemperance .but 
the cessation of it. Nature must be released 
from the unnatural war which is made upon her, 
and be allowed to rest, and then nutrition, and 
sleep, and exercise, will perform the work of 
restoration. Gradually the spring of life will re- 
cover tone, appetite will return, digestion become 
efficient, sleep sweet, and the muscular system 
vigorous, until the elastic heart with every be*t 
shall send health through the system, and joy 
through the soul. 

But what shall be done for those to whom it 
might be fatal to stop short ? Many are reputed 
to be in this condition, probably, who are not 
and those who are, may, while -under the care 
of a physician, be dealt with, as he may think 
best for the time, provided they obey strictly as 
patients his prescriptions. But if, w hen they are 
committed to their own care again, thoy cannot 
live without ardent spirits then they must die, 
and have only the alternative to die as refoimed 
penitents, or as incorrigibly intemperate to die 
in a manner which shall secure pardon and 
admission to heaven, or in a manner which shall 
exclude them forever from that holy world. 

As the application of this discourse, I would 
recommend to every one of you who hear it, 
immediate and faithful self-examination, to as- 
certain whether any of the symptoms of intem- 
perance are beginning to show themselves upon 



44 THE SIGNS 

you. And let not the consideration that you 
have never been suspected, and have never 
suspected yourselves of intemperance, deprive 
you of the benefit of this scrutiny. For it is 
inattention and self-confidence which supersede 
discretion, and banish fear, and let in the de- 
stroyer, to fasten upon his victim, before he 
thinks of danger or attempts resistance. 

Are there then set times, days, and places, 
when you calculate always to indulge yourselves 
711 drinking ardent spirits ? Do you stop often 
lo take something at the tavern when you travel, 
and always when you come to the village, town, 
or city. This frequency of drinking will plant 
in your system, before you are aware of it, the 
seeds of the most terrific disease which aHlicts 
humanity. Have you any friends or compan- 
ions whose presence, when you meet them, 
awakens the thought and the desire of drink- 
ing ? Both of you have entered on a course in 
which there is neither safety n^r hope, but from 
instant retreat. 

Do any of you love to avail yourselves of 
every little catch and circumstance among your 
companions, to bring out " a treat ?" " Alas, 
my lord, there is death in ihe p"t." 

Do you find the desire of strong drink return- 
ing daily, and at stated hours? Unless you in- 
tend to travel all the length of the highway of 
intempeiarice, it is time to stop. Unless you 
intend soon to resign your liberty forever, and 
come under a despotism of the most cruel and 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 45 

inexorable character, you must abandon the 
morning bitters, the noontide stimulant, and 
the evening bowl. 

Do any of you drink in secret, because you 
are unwilling your friends or the world should 
know how much you drink ? You might as 
well cut loose in a frail boat before a hurricane, 
and expect safety : you are gone, gone irretriev- 
ably, if you do not stop. 

Are you accustomed to drink, when opportu- 
nities present, as much as you can bear without 
any public tokens of inebriation ? You are an 
intemperate man now, and unless you check the 
habit, you will become rapidly more and more 
intemperate, until concealment becomes impos- 
sible. 

Do your eyes, in any instance, begin to trou- 
ble you by their weakness or inflammation ? If 
you are in the habit o( drinking ardent spirits 
daily, you need not ask the physician what is 
the matter nor inquire for eye water. Your 
redness of eyes is produced by intemperance; 
and abstinence, and that only, will cure them. 
It may be well for every man who drinks daily, 
to look in the glass often, that he may see in his 
own face the signals of distress, which abused 
nature holds out one after another, and top often 
holds out in vain. 

Do any of yo'i find a tremour of the hand 
coming upon you, and sinking of spirits, and 
loss of appetite in the moriiing ? Nature is fail- 



46 THE SIGNS OF INTEMPERANCE. 

ing, and giving to you timely admonition of her 
distress. 

Do the pains of a disordered stomach, and 
blistered tongue and lip, begin to torment you ? 
You are far advanced in the work of self-destruc- 
tion a few more years will probably finish it. 



SERMON III. 



THE EVILS OF INTEMPERANCE. 



HABAKKUK, ii. 911, 15, 16. 

Wo to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that 
ne rn-iy set his nest on high, that lie may be delivered from the 
power of evil ! Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting 
off many people, and hast sinned against thy srul. For the stone 
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall an- 
swer it. 

Wo unto him that giveth his neighbor drink, that puttest thy bot- 
tle to him, and makrst him drunken also, that thoii mayest look on 
their nakedness I Thou art rilled with shame for glory : drink thou 
also, and let thy fcreskin be uncovered : the cup of the LORD'S right 
band shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on 
thy glory. 

IN the preceding discourses we have illus- 
trated THE NATURE, THE OCCASIONS, AND THE 
SYMPTOMS OF INTEMPERANCE. 

In this discourse we propose to illustrate THE 

EVILS OF INTEMPERANCE. 

The physical and moral influence of this sin 
upon its victims, has of necessity been disclosed 
in giving an account of the causes and symptoms 
of this crimina 1 disease. We shall therefore take 
a more comprehensive view of the subject, ani 



48 THE EVILS 

consider the effect of intemperance upon nation 
al prosperity. To this view of the suhject the 
text leads us'. It announces the general princi- 
ple, that communities which rise by a violation 
of the laws of humanity and equity, shall not 
prosper, and especially that wealth amassed by 
promoting intemperance, will bring upon the 
community intemperance, and poverty, and 
shaim, as a providential retribution. 

1. The effects of intemperance upon the 
health and physical energies of a nation, are 
not to be overlooked, or lightly esteemed. 

No fact is more certain than the transmission 
of temperament and of physical constitution, ac- 
cording to the predominant moral condition of 
society, from age to age. Luxury produces ef- 
feminacy, and transmits to other generations im- 
becility and disease. Bring up the generation of 
the Romans who carried victory over the world, 
and place them beside the effeminate Italians of 
the present day, and the effect of crime upon 
constitution will be sufficiently apparent. Ex- 
cesses unmake the man. The stature dwindles, 
the joints are loosely compacted, and the mus- 
cular fibre lias lost its elastic tone. No giant's 
hones will be found in the cemeteries of a nation, 
over whom, for centuries, the waves of intempe- 
rance have rolled ; and no unwieldy iron armour, 
tV.e annoyance and defence of other days, will 
be dug up as memorials of departed glory. 

The duration of human life, and the relative 
amount of health or disease, will manifestly vary 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 49 

according to the amount of ardent spirits con- 
sumed in the land. Even now, no small propor- 
tion of the deaths which annually make up our 
national bills of mortality, are cases of thos^ 
who have been brought to an untimely end, and 
who have, directly or indir9ctly, fallen victims 
to the deleterious influence of ardent spirits ; 
fulfilling, with fearful accuracy, the prediction, 
" the wicked shall not live out half their days.'' 
As the jackal follows the lion to prey i:pon the 
slain, so Jo disease and death wait on the foot- 
steps of inebriation. The free and universal use 
of intoxicating liquors for a few centuries cannot 
fail to bring down our race from the majestic, 
athletic forms of our Fathers, to the similitude 
' of a despicable and puny race of men. Already 
the commencement of the decline is manifest, 
and the consummation of it, should the causes 
continue, will not linger. 

2. The iLJurious influence of general intem- 
perance upon national intellect, is equally cer- 
tain, and not less to be deprecated. 

To the action of a powerful mind, a vigorous 
muscular frame is, as a general rule, indispensa- 
ble. Like heavy ordnance, the mind, in its 
efforts, recoils on the body, and will soon shake 
down a puny frame. The mental action and 
physical reaction must be equal or, finding her 
energies unsustaiued, the mind itself becomes 
discouraged, and falls into despondency and im- 
becility. The flow o/ animal spirits, the fire 
and vigor of the imagination, the fulness and 
5 



50 THE EVILS 

power of feeling, the comprehension and grasp 
of thought, the tire of the eye, the tones of the 
voice, and the electrical energy of utterance, all 
depend upon the healthful and vigorous tone of 
the animal system, and by whatever means the 
body is unstrung, the spirit languishes. Cajsar, 
when he had a fever once, and cried " give 
me some drink, Titinius," was not that god who 
aftenvards overturned the republic, and reigned 
without a rival and Bonaparte, it has been 
said, lost the Russian cajnpaign by a fever. 
The greatest poets and orators who stand on the 
'records of immortality, flourished in the iron age, 
before the habits of effeminacy had unharnessed 
the body and unstrung the mind. This is true 
of Homer, and Demosthenes-, and Milton ; and if 
Virgil and Cicero are to be classed with them, it 
is not without a manifest abatement of vigor for 
beauty, produced by the progress of voluptuous- 
ness in the age in which they lived. 

The giant writers o/ Scotland are, soice of 
them, men of threescore and ten, who still go 
forth to the athletic sports of their youthful days 
with undiminished elasticity. The taper fingers 
of modern effeminacy never wielded such a pen 
as these men wield, and never will. 

The taste may be cultivated in alliance with 
effeminacy, and music may flourish, while all 
that is manly is upon the decline, and there may 
be some fitful flashes of imagination in poetry, 
which are the offspring of a capricious, nervous 
excitability and perhaps there may be some- 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 51 

times an unimpassioned stillness of soul in a 
feeble body, which shall capacitate for simple 
intellectual discrimination. But that fulness of 
soul, and diversified energy of mind, which is 
indispensable to national went i'i all its diver- 
sified application, can be found only in alliance 
with an uiulcbased and vigorous muscular sys- 
tem. 

The history of the world confirms this con- 
clusion. Egypt, once at the head of nations, 
lias, under the weight of her own efleminacy, 
gone down to the dust. The victories of Greece 
let in, upon her the luxuries of the east, and 
covered her glory with a night of ages. And 
Rome, whose iron foot trode down the nations, 
and shook the earth, witnessed in her latter 
days faintnes.s of heart and the shield of the 
mighty vilely cast away. 

3. The effect of intemperance upon the mili- 
tary prowess of a nation, cannot but be great 
and evil. The mortality in the seasoning of 
recruits, already half destroyed by intemperance, 
will be double to that experienced among hardy 
and temperate men. 

If in the early wars of our country the mor- 
tality of the camp had been as great as it has 
b^ien since intemperance has facilitated the rais- 
ing of recruits, New England would have been 
depopulated, Philip had remained lord of his 
wilderness, or the French had driven our Fathers 
into the sea, extending from Canada to Cape 
Horn the empire of despotism and superstition. 



52 THE EVILS 

An army, whose energy in conflict depends on 
the excitement of ardent spirits, cannot possess 
the coolness nor sustain the shock of a powerful 
onset, like an army of determined, temperate 
men. It was the religious principle and tempe- 
rance of Cromwell's army, that made it terrible 
to the licentious troops of Charles the First. 

4. The effect of intemperance upon the pat- 
riotism of a nation is neither obscure nor doubtful. 
When excess has despoiled the man of the natu- 
ral affections of husband, father, brother, and 
friend, and thrust him down to the condition of 
an animal ; we are not to expect of him compre- 
hensive vie;vs, and a disinterested regard for his 
country. His patriotism may serv~ as a theme 
of sinister profession, or inebriate blasting. But, 
what is the patriotism which loves only in words, 
and in general, and violates in detail all the 
relative duties on which the Avelfare of country 
depends ! 

The man might as well talk of justice and 
mercy, who robs and murders upon the highway, 
as he whose example is pestiferous, and whose 
presence withers the tender charities of life, and 
perpetuates weeping, lamentation, jmd wo. A 
nation of drunkards would constitute a hell. 

5. Upon the national conscience or moral 
principle the effects of intemperance are deadly. 

It obliterates the fear of the Lord, and a sense 
of accountability, paralyses the power of con- 
science, and hardens the heart, and turns out 
upon society a sordid, selfish, ferocious animal. 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 53 

6. Upon national industry the effects of intem- 
perance are manifest and mischievous. ' 

The results of national industry depend on 
the amount of well-directed intellectual and phy- 
sical power. But intemperance paralyses and 
prevents both these springs of human action. 

In the inventory of national loss by intempe- 
rance, may be set. down the labor prevented 
by indolence, by debility, by sickness, by quar- 
rels and litigation, by gambling and idleness, by 
mistakes and" misdirected effort, by improvi- 
dence and wastefulness, and by the shortened 
date of human life and activity. Little wastes 
in great establishments constantly occurring 
may defeat the energies of a mighty capital. 
But where the intellectual and muscular energies 
are raised to the working point daily by ardent 
spirits, until the agriculture, and commerce, 
and arts of a nation move on by the power of 
artificial stimulus, that moral power cannot be 
maintained, which will guaranty fidelity, and that 
physical power cannot be preserved and well 
directed, which will ensure national prosperity. 
The nation whose immense enterprise is thrust 
forward by the stimulus of ardeut spirits, cannot 
ultimately escape debility and bankruptcy. 

When we behold an individual cut off in 
youth, or in middle age, or witness the waning 
energies, improvidence, and unfaithfulness of a 
neighbor, it is but a single instance, and we 
become accustomed to it; but such instances 
are multiplying in our land in every direction, 
S* 



54 THE EVILS 

and are to be found in every department of 
labor, and the amount of earnings prevented or 
squandered is incalculable : to all which must 
be added the accumulating and frightful expense 
incurred for the support of those and their fami- 
lies, whom intemperance has made paupers. In 
every city and town the poor-tax, created chielly 
by intemperance, is augmenting. The recep- 
tacles for the poor are becoming too strait for 
their accommodation. We must pull them down 
and build greater to provide accommodations for 
the votaries of inebriation ; for the frequency of 
going upon the town has taken away the reluc- 
tance of pride, and destroyed the motives to pro- 
vidence which the fear of poverty and suffering 
once supplied. The prospect of a destitute old 
age, or of a suffering family, no longer troubles 
the vicious portion of our community. They 
drink up their daily earnings, and bless God for 
the poor-house, and begin to look upon it as, of 
right, the drunkard's home, and contrive to arrive 
thither as early as idleness and excess will give 
them a passport to this sinecure of vice. Thus 
is the insatiable destroyer of industry marching 
through the land, rearing poor-houses, and aug- 
menting taxation : night and day, with sleepless 
activity, squandering property, cutting the sinews 
of industry, unuennimttg vigor, engendering 
disease, paralysing intellect, impairing moral 
principle, cutting short the date of life, and roll- 
ing up a national debt, invisible, but real and 
terrific as the debt of England" continually trans- 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 55 

ferring larger and larger bodies of men, from the 
class of contributors to the national income, to the 
class of worthless consumers. 

Add the loss sustained by the subtraction of 
labor, and the shortened date of life, to the 
expense of sustaining the poor, created by intem- 
perance; and the nation is now taxed annually 
more than the expense which would be requisite 
for the maintenance of government, and for the 
support of all our schools and colleges, and -all 
the religious instruction of the nation. Already 
a portion of the entire capital of the nation is 
mortgaged for the support of drunkards. There 
seems to be no other fast property in the land, 
but this inheritance of the intemperate : all other 
riches may make to themselves wings and fly 
away. But until the nation is bankrupt, accord- 
ing to the laws of the State, the drunkard and 
his family must have a home. Should the 
pauperism of crime augment in this country as 
it has done for a few years past, there is nothing 
to stop the frightful results which have come upon 
England, where property is abandoned in some 
parishes, because the poor-tax exceeds the annual 
income. You who are husbandmen, are accus- 
tomed to feel as if your houses and lands were 
wholly your own ; but if you will ascertain the 
per centage of annual taxation levied on your 
property for the support of the intemperate, you 
w ill perceive how much of your capital is held 
by drunkards, by a tenure as sure as if held 
under mortgages, or deeds of warranty. Your 



56 THE EVILS 

widows and children do not take by descent 
more certainly, than the most profligate and 
worthless part of the community. Every intem- 
perate and idle man, whom you behold tottering 
about the streets and steeping himself at the 
stores, regards your houses and lands as pledged 
to take care of him, puts his hands deep, an- 
nually, into your pockets, and eats his bread in 
the sweat of your brows, instead of his own : 
and with marvellous good nature you bear it. If 
a robber should break loose on the highway, to 
levy taxation, an armed force would be raised to 
hunt iiim from society. But the tippler may do 
it fearlessly, in open day, and not a voice is 
raised, not a finger is lifted. 

The effects of intemperance upon civil liberty 
may not be lightly passed over. 

It is admitted that intelligence and virtue are 
the pillars of republican institutions, and that the 
illumination of schools, and the moral power of 
religious institutions, are indispensable to pro- 
duce this intelligence and virtue. 

But who are found so uniformly in the ranks 
of irreligion as the intemperate? Who like 
these violate the Sabbath, and set their mouth 
against the heavens neglecting the education 
of their families and corrupting their mora^? 
Almost the entire amount of national ignorance 
and crime is the offspring of intemperance. 
Throughout the land, the intemperate are hew- 
ing down the pillars, and undermining the foun- 
dations of our national edifice. Legions have 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 57 

besieged it, aud upon every gate the battle-axe 
rings ; and still the sentinels sleep. 

Should the evil advance as it has done, the 
day is not far distant when the great body of the 
laboring classes of the community, the bones 
and sinews of the nation, will be contaminated ; 
and when this is accomplished, the right of 
suffrage becomes the engine of self-destruction. 
For the laboring classes constitute an immense 
majority, and when these are perverted by intem- 
perance, ambition needs uo better implements 
with which to dig the grave of our liberties, and 
entomb our glory. 

Such is the influence of interest, ambition, 
fear, and indolence, that one violent partisan, 
with a handful of disciplined troops, may over- 
rule the influence of five hundred temperate 
men, who act without concert. Already is the 
disposition to temporize, to tolerate, and even to 
court the intemperate, too apparent, on Account 
of the apprehended retribution of their perverted 
suffrage. The whole power of law, through the 
nation, sleeps in the statute book, and until 
public sentiment is roused and concentrated, it 
may be doubted whether its execution is pos- 
sible. \ 

Where is the city, town, or village, in which 
the laws are not openly violated, and where is 
the magistracy that dares to carry into effect the 
laws against the vending or drinking of ardent 
spirits ? Here then an aristocracy of bad influ- 
ence has already risen up, which bids defiance 



38 THE EVILS 

to law, and threatens the extirpation of civil 
liberty. As intemperance increases, the power 
of taxation will come more and more into the 
hands of men of intemperate habits and despe- 
rate fortunes ; of course the laws gradually will 
become subservient to the debtor, and less effi- 
cacious in protecting the rights of property. 
This will be a vital stab to liberty to ihe secu- 
rity of which property is indispensable. For 
money is the sinew of war and when those 
who hold the property of a nation cannot be 
protected in their rights, they will change the 
form of government, peaceably if they may, by 
violence if they must. 

In proportion to the numbers who have no 
right in the soil, and no capital at stake, and no 
moral principle, will the nation be exposed to 
violence and revolution. In Europe, the phy- 
sical power is bereft of the right of suffrage, and 
by the bayonet is kept down. But in this nation, 
the power which may be wielded by the intem- 
perate and ignorant is tremendous. These are 
the troops of the future Coesors, by whose per- 
verted suffrages our future elections may be 
swayed, and ultimately our liberties destroyed. 
They are the corps of irreligious and desperate 
men, who have something to hope, and nothing 
to fear, from revolutiun and blood. Of such 
materials w:as the army of Catiline composed, 
who conspired against the liberties of Rome. 
And iii the French revolution, such men as La- 
fayette were soon swept from the helm, by mobs 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 59 

composed of the dregs of creation, to give place 
to the revolutionary furies which followed. 

We boast of our liberties, and rejoice in our 
prcspecuve instrumentality in disenthralling the 
world. But our own foundations rest on the 
heaving sides of a burning mountain, through 
which, in thousands of places, the fire has burst 
out, and is blazing around us. If they cannot 
be extinguished, we are undone. Our sun is 
fast setting, and the darkness of an endless night 
is closing in upon us. 



SERMON IV. 



THE REMEDY OF INTEMPERANCE. 



I1&BAKKUK, ii. 9 11, 15, 16. 

Wo to him thatcoveteth nn evil covetousness to his house, that 
he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the 
power of evil ! Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting 
off many people, and 1iast sinned against thy soul. For the stone 
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall an- 
swer it. 

U'o unto him tint giveth his neighbor drink, that puttest thy bot- 
tle to him, and niakcsl him drunken also, that thou niayest look on 
their nakedness! Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou 
also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the LORD'S right 
hand shall be turned unto tliee, and shameful spewing shal! be on 
thy glory. 

WE now come to the inquiry, BY WHAT 

MEANS CAN THE EVIL OF INTEMPERANCE BE 

STAYED? and the answer is, not by any one 
ihing, but by every tin ig which can be pat in 
requisition to hem in the army of the destroyer, 
and impede his march, and turn him back, and 
redeem the land. 

Intemperance is a national sic, carrying de- 
struction from the centre to every extremity of 
the empire, and calling upon the nation to array 
itself, en masse, against it. 
6 

I 



62 THE REMEDY 

It is in vain to rely alone upon self-govern- 
ment, and voluntary abstinence. This, by all 
means, should be encouraged and enforced, and 
may limit the evil, but can never expel it. Alike 
hopeless are all the efforts of the pulpit, and the 
press, without something more radical, efficient 
and permanent. If knowledge o;:..y, or argu- 
ment, or motive, were needed, the task of re- 
formation would be easy. But argumtnt may as 
well be exerted upon the wind, and motive be 
applied to chain dow:i the waves. Thirst, and 
the love of filthy lucre, are incorrigible. Many 
may be saved b) these means ; but with nothing 
more, many will be lost, and the evil will go 
down to other ages. Alike hopeless is the attempt 
to stop intemperance by mere civil coercion. 

There is too much capital vested in the impor- 
tation, distillation, and vending of ardent spirits, 
and too brisk a demand for their consumption 
in the market, to render mere legal enactments 
and prohibitions, of sufficient influence to keep 
the practice of trafficking in ardent spirits within 
safe limits. As well might the ocean be poured 
out upon the Andes, and its waters be stopped 
from rushing violently down their sides. It 
would require an omniscient eye, and an al- 
mighty arm, punishing with speedy and certain 
retribution all delinquents, to stay the progress 
of intemperance in the presence of the all-per- 
vading temptation of ardent spirits. 

Magistrates WILL NOT, and CANNOT, if they 
would, execute the laws against the unlawful 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 63 

rending and drinking of ardent spirits, amid a 
population who hold the right of suffrage, and 
are in favor of free indulgence. The effort, 
before the public sentiment was prepared for it, 
would hurl them quick from their elevation, and 
exalt others who would be no terror to evil 
doer's. Our Fathers could enforce morality by 
law ; but the times are changed, and unless we 
can regulate public sentiment, and secure mo- 
rality in some other way, WE ARE UNDONE. 

Voluntary associations to support the magis- 
trate in the execution of the law are useful, but 
r-fter all are ineffectual for though, in a single 
town, or state, they may effect a temporary 
reformation, it requires an effort to make them 
universal, and to ke^p up .their energy, which 
never has been, and never will be made. 

Besides, the reformation of a town, or even of 
a state, is but emptying of its waters the bed of 
a river, to be instantly replaced by the waters 
from above ; or like the creation of a vacuum in 
the atmosphere, which is instantly filled by the 
pressure of the circumjacent air. 

The remedy, whatever it may be, must be 
universal, operating permanently, at all times, 
and in all places. Short of this, every thing 
which can be done, will be but the application 
of temporary expedients. 

There is somewhere a mighty energy of evil 
at work in the production of intemperance, and 
until we can discover and destroy this vital 
power of mischief, we shall labor in vain. 



64 THE REMEDY 

Intemperance in our land is not accidental ; 
it is rolling in upon us by the violation of some 
great laws of human nature. In our view?, and 
in our practice as a nation, there is something 
fundamentally wrong; and the remedy, like the 
evil, must be found in the correct application of 
general principles. It must be a universal and 
national remedy. 

What then is this universal, natural, and na- 
tional remedy for intemperance ? 

IT IS THE BANISHMENT OF ARDENT SPIRITS 
FROM THE LIST OF LAWFUL ARTICLES OF COM- 
MERCE, BY A CORRECT AND EFFICIENT PUBLIC 
SENTIMENT J SUCH AS HAS TURNED SLAVERY 
OUT OF HALF OCR LAND, AND WILL YET EXPEL 
IT FROM THE WORLD. 

Nothing should now be said, by way of crimi- 
nation for the past, for verily we have all been 
guilty in this thing; so that thefe are few in the 
land, whose brother's blood may not cry out 
against them from the ground, on account of 
the bad influence which has been lent in some 
way to the work of destruction. 

We are not therefore to come down in wrath 
upon the distillers, and importers, and venders 
of ardent spirits. None of us are enough with- 
out sin to cast the first stone. For who would 
have imported, or distilled, or vended, if all the 
nominally temperate in the land had refased to 
drink ? It is the buyers AVUO have created the 
demand for ardent spirits, and made distillation 
and importation a gainful traffick. And it is 



OF INTEMPERANCE. OS 

the custom of the temperate too, which inun- 
dates the land with the occasion of so much 
and such unmanageable temptation. Let the 
temperate cease to buy and the demand for 
ardent spirits will fall in the market three 
fourths, and ultimately will fail wholly, as the 
ration of drunkards shall . hasten, out of 
time. 

To insist that men, whose capital is embarked 
in the production, or vending of ardent spirits, 
shall manifest f he entire magnanimity and soli- 
denial, which is needful to save the land, though 
the example would be glorious to them, is more 
than we have a right to expect or demand. Let 
the consumer do his duty, and the capitalist, 
finding his employment unproductive, will quick- 
ly discover other channels of 'useful enterprise. 
All language of impatient censure, against those 
who embarked in the traflick of ardent spirits 
while it was deemed a lawful calling, should 
therefore be forborne. It would only serve to 
irritate and arouse prejudice, and prevent in- 
vestigation, and concentrate a deaf and deadly 
opposition against the work of reformation. No 
ex post facto laws. Let us all rather confess the 
sins which are past, and leave the things which 
are behind, and press forward in one harmonious 
attempt to reform the land, and perpetuate our 
invaluable blersings. 

This however cannot be done effectually so 
long as the traffick in ardent spirits is regarded 
as lawful, and is patronised by men of reputation 
5* 



66 THE REMEDY 

and moral worth in every part of the land. Like 
slavery, it must be regarded as sinful, impolitic, 
and dishonorable. That no measuies will avail 
short of rendering ardent spirits a contraband of 
trade, is nearly self-evident. 

Could intemperance be stopped, did all the 
rivers in the land flow with inebriating and fas- 
cinating liquids ? But the abundance and cheap- 
ness of ardent spirits is such, that, surrounded 
as it is by the seductions of company, and every 
artifice of entertainment, it is more tempting 
and fatal than if it flo.wed freely as water. 
Then, like the inferior creation, men might be 
expected to drink when athirst, and to drink 
alone. But intemperance now is a social sin, 
and on that account exerts a power terrific and 
destructive as the plague. 

That the trafnck in ardent spirits is wrong, 
and should be abandoned as a great national 
evil, is evident from the following considera- 
tions. 

1. It employs a multitude of men, and a vast 
amount of capital, to no useful purpose. The 
medicinal use of ardent spirits is allowed ; for 
this however the apothecary can furnish an 
adequate supply : but considered as an article 
of commerce, for ordinary use, it adds nothing 
to animal or social enjoyment, to muscular 
power, to intellectual vigor, or moral feeling. 
It does, indeed, produce paroxysms of muscular 
effort, of intellectual vigor, and of exhilarated 
feeling, but it ia done only by an improvident 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 07 

draught upon nature by anticipation, to be pu- 
nished by a languor and debility proportioned to 
the excess. No man leaves behind him a mor; 
valuable product of labor, as the result of artifi- 
cial stimulus, than the even industry of unstimu- 
lated nature would have produced; or blesses 
the world with better specimens of intellectual 
power ; or instructs it by a bettei example ; or 
drinks enjoyment from a fuller, sweeter cup, 
than that which nature provides. But if the 
premises are just, who can resist the conclu- 
sion ? To what purpose is all this waste ? Is it 
not the duty of every man to serve his genera- 
tion in some useful employment ? Is not idleness 
a sin ? But in what respect does that occupa- 
tion differ from idleness which adds nothing to 
national prosperity, or to individual or social 
enjoyment ? Agriculture, commerce, and the 
arts are indispensable to the perfection of human 
character, and the formation of the happiest 
state of society ; and if some evils are inseparable 
from their prosecution, there is a vast overba- 
lancing amount of good. But where is the good 
produced by the traffick in ardent spirits, to 
balance the enormous evils inseparable from the 
trade ? What drop of good does it pour into the 
ocean of misery which it creates ? And is all 
this expense of capital, and time, and effort, to 
be sustained for nothing ? Look at the mighty 
system of useless operations the fleet of vessels 
running to and fro the sooty buildings tlxough- 
out the land, darkening the heavens wilh their 



08 THE REMEDY 

steam and smoke the innumerable company of 
boats, and wagons, and horses, and men a 
more numerous cavalry than ever shook the 
blood-stained plains of Europe a larger convoy 
than ever bore on the waves the baggage of an 
army and more men than wete -ever devoted 
at once to the work of desolation and blood. 
All these begin, continue, and end their days 
in the production and distribution of a liquid, 
the entire consumption of which is useless. 
Should all the capital thus employed, and all 
the gains acquired, be melted into one mass / and 
thrown into the sea, nothing would be subtracted 
from national wealth or enjoyment. Had ail 
the men and animals slept the whole time, no 
vacancy of good had been occasioned. 

Is this then the manner in whjch rational 
beings should be willing to spend their days in 
which immortal beings should fill up the short 
period of their probation, and make up the ac- 
count to be rendered to God of the deeds done, 
in the body in which benevolent beings, de- 
siring to emulate the goodness cf the great God, 
should be satisfied to employ their powers ? 

It is admitted that the trade employs and sus- 
tains many families, and that in many instances 
the profits are appropriated to useful purposes. 
But this is no more than might have been said 
of the slave trade. The same families might be 
as well sustained in some other way, and the 
same profits might be earned and applied to use- 
ful purposes in some other calling. The earth is 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 69 

not so narrow, nor population so dense, nor the 
useful avocations so overstocked, as that large 
portions of time, and capital, and labor, may be 
devoted to the purpose of sustaining life merely, 
without reference to public utility. 

The merchant who deals in ardent spirits is 
himself a loser ; for a temperate population con- 
sume more, and pay better, and live longer, than 
the intemperate; and among such a population 
merchants would do more business, and secure 
better profits than when they depend for any 
part of their gains upon the sale of ardent spirits. 
What merchant, looking out for a place where 
to establish himself in trade, would neglect the 
invitation of temperate, thrifty farmers and me- 
chanics, and settle down in a village of riot and 
drunkenness made up of tipplers, widows, and 
beggared children of old houses, broken win- 
dows, and dilapidated fences ? 

I push not this argument reproachfully, but 
for the purpose of awakening conscientious in- 
vestigation. We are- a free people. No imperial 
ukase, or forest of bayonets, can make us moral 
and industrious, or turn us back if we go astray. 
Our own intelligence and moral energy must 
reclaim us, or we shall perish in our sins. 

2. The amount of suffering and mortality in- 
separable from the commerce in ardent spirits, 
renders it an unlawful article of trade. 

The wickedness is proverbial of those who 
in ancient days caused their children to pass 
through the fire unto Moloch. But how many 



70 THE REMEDY 

thousands of children are there in our land who 
endure daily privations and sufferings, which 
render life a burden, and would have made the 
momentary pang of infant sacrifice a blessing ? 
Theirs is a lingering, living death. There never 
was a Moloch to whom were immolated yearly 
as many children as are immolated, or kept in a 
state of constant suffering in this land of nominal 
Christianity. We have no drums and gongs to 
drown their cries, neither do we make convo- 
cations, and bring them all out for one mighty 
burning. The fires which consume them are 
slow fires, and they blaze balefully in every part 
of our land; throughout which the cries of 
injured children and orphans go up to heaven. 
Could all these woes, the product of intempe- 
rance, be brought out into one place, and the 
monster who inflicts the sufferings be seen per- 
sonified, the nation would be furious with in- 
dignation. Humanity, conscience, religion, all 
would conspire to stop a work of such malignity. 
We are appalled, and shocked, at the ac- 
counts from the east, of widows burnt 'ipou the 
'uneral piles of their departed husbands. .But 
what if those devotees of superstition, the Brah- 
mins, had discovered a mode of prolonging the 
lives of the victims for years amid the llames, 
and by these protracted burnings were accus- 
tomed to torture life away ? We might almost 
rouse up a crusade to cross the deep, to stop by 
force such inhumanity. But, alas ! we should 
leave behind us, on our own shores, more wives 



Ut INTEMPERANCE. 71 

m the fire, than we should find of widows thus 
sacrificed in all the east ; a fire too, whirh, be- 
sides its action upon the body, tortures the soui 
by lust atl'ections, and ruined hopes, and pros- 
pective wretchedness. 

It is high time to enter upon the business of 
collecting facts on this subject. The statistics 
of intemperance should be published ; for no 
man has comprehended as yet the height, and 
depth, and length, arid breadth of this mighty 
evil. 

We execrate the cruelties of the slave trade 
the husband torn from the bosom of his wife 
the son from his father brothers and sisters 
separated forever whole families in a moment 
ruined ! But are there no similar enormities to 
be witnessed in the United States ? None in- 
deed perpetrated by the bayonet but -many, 
very many, perpetrated by intemperance. 

Every year thousands of families are robbed 
of fathers, brothers, husbands, friends. Every 
year widows and orphans are multiplied, and 
grey hairs are brought with sorrow to the grave 
no disease makes such inroads upon families, 
blasts so many hopes, destroys so many lives, 
and causes so many mourners to go about the 
streets, because man goeth to his long home. 

We have heard of the horrors of the middle 
passage the transportation of slaves the chains 
the darkness the stench the mortality and 
living madness of wo and it is dreadful. But 
bring together the victims of intemperance, and 



72 TUB REMEDY 

crowd them into one vast lazar-house, and 
sights of wo quite as appalling would meet your 
eyes. 

Yes, in this nation there is a middle passage 
of slavery, and darkness, and chains, and dis- 
ease, and death. But it is a middle passage, not 
from Africa to America, hut from time to eter- 
nity, and not of slaves whom death will release 
from suffering, but of those whose sufferings at 
death do but just begin. Could all the sighs of 
these captives be wafted on one breeze, it would 
be loud as thunder. Could all ti;eir tears be 
assembled, they would be like the sea. 

The health of a nation is a matter of vast 
importance, and none may directly and avowedly 
sport with it. The importation and dissemina- 
tion of fevers for filthy lucre's sake, would not 
be endured, and he who should import and 
plant the seed of trees, which, like the fabled 
Upas, poisoned the atmosphere, and paved the 
earth around with bones, would meet with uni- 
versal execration. The construction of morasses 
and staguout lakes, sending out poisonous exha- 
lations, and depopulating the country around, 
would soon be stopped by the interposition of 
law. And should a foreign army land upon our 
shores, to levy such a tax upon us as intempe- 
rance levies, and to threaten our liberties as in- 
temperance threatens them, and to inflict such 
enormous sufferings as intemperance inflicts, no 
mortal power could resist the swelling tide of 
indignation tha* would overwhelm it. 



OF INTtMPERANCE. 73 

It is only in the form of ardent spirits in the 
way of a lawful trade extended over the entire 
land, that fevers n:;:y be imported and dissemi- 
1 that trees of death may be planted 
that extrusive morasses may be opened, and ?. 
moral minima spn-ad over the nation and that 
an armed host may lan.l, to levy upon us enor- 
mous taxations, to undermine our liberties, bind 
our hands, and put our feet in fetters. This 
dreadful work is goin^ on, and yet the nation. 
sleeps. Say not that all these evils result from 
the abuse of ardent spirits ; for as human nature' 
is constituted, the abuse is as certain as any of 
the laws.of nature. The commerce therefore, 
in ardent spirits, which produces no good, and 
produces a certain and an immense amount of 
evil, must be regarded as an unlawful commerce, 
and ought, upon every principle of humanity, 
and patriotism, and conscience, and religion, to 
be abandoned and proscribed. 
7 



SERMON V. 



THE REMEDY OF INTEMPERANCE. 



HABAKKDK, ii. 911, 15, 16. 



Wo to him thatcoveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that 
he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the 
power of evil I Thou hast consulted shame to thy house hy cutting 
olTmany people, and hast sinned against thy soul. For the stone 
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall an- 
swer it. 

U'n unto him that giveth his neighbor drink, 'hat piittet thy bot- 
tle to him, and makesi him drunken also, that lliou mayest look on 
their nakedness! Thou art tilled with shame for plory : drink thou. 
also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the ciipuf the LORD'S right 
hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on 
thy glory. 

WE have endeavored to show that commerce 
in ardent spirits is unlawful, 

1. Inasmuch as it is useless ; and 

2. As it is eminently pernicious. 

We now proceed to adduce further evidence 
of its unlawfulness and observe, 

3. That it seems to be a manifest violation of 
the command, " Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself;" and of various other evangelical 
precepts. 

No man can act in the spirit of impartial love 



76 THE REMEDY 

to his neighbor, who for his own personal emolu- 
ment, inflicts on him great and irreparable evil ; 
for love worketh no ill to his neighbor. Love 
will not burn a neighbor's house, or poison his 
food, or blast his reputation, or destroy his soul. 
But the commerce in ardent spirits does all this 
nevitably and often. Property, reputation, 
health, life and salvation fall before it. 

The direct infliction of what is done indi- 
rectly, would subject a man to the ignominy of 
a public execution. Is it not forbidden then by 
the command which requires us to love our 
neighbor as ourselves ? " Whatsoever ye would 
that men should do to you, do ye even so to 
them." Be willing to do for others whatever 
you may demand of them, and inflict nothing 
upon them which you would not be willing to 
receive. But who is willing to be made a 
drunkard, and to have his property squandered, 
and his family ruined, for his neighbor's emolu- 
ment ? Good were it for the members of a 
family if they had never been born, rather than 
to have all the eVils visited upon them, which 
are occasioned by the sale of ardent spirits. 

It is scarcely a palliation of this evil that no 
man is destroyed maliciously or with any di- 
rect intent to kill for the certainty of evil is as 
great as if waters were poisoned which some 
persons would surely drink, or as if a man 
should fire in the daik upon masses of human 
beings, where it must be certain that death 
would be the consequence to some. 



OP INTEMPEUANCE. 77 

Those who engage in this traffick, are expos- 
ed to temptations to intemperance which no man 
will needlessly encounter who has that regard to 
the preservation of his own life and virtue, which 
the huv of God requires. All who are employed 
in vending ardent spirits in small quantities, do 
not of course -become intemperate. But the 
company in whose presence they pass so much 
of their time, and the constant habit of mixing 
and tasting, has been the means of casting down 
many strong men wounded. It is also a part of 
the threatened retribution, that those who amass 
property by promoting intemperance in ethers, 
shall themselves be punished by falling under 
the dominion of the same sin. " Wo unto him 
that giveth his neighbor drink, that puttest thy 
bottle to him, and makest him drunken also 
Thou art filled with shame for glory : drink thou 
also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered : the cup 
of the Lord's right hand shall be turned unto 
thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy 
glory." 

The injustice which is so inseparable from the 
traffick in ardent spirits, evinces its unlawfulness. 

Those who vend ardent spirits will continue 
to supply their customers, in many instances, 
after they have ceased to be competent to take 
care of their property. They are witnesses to 
their dealing with a slack h.nd, their improvi- 
dence, and the accumulation of their debts ; and, 
to save themselves, must secure their own claims 

by obtaining mortgages on the property of the*e 
T * 



78 THE REMEDY 

wretched victims, which they finally foreclose, 
and thus wind up the scene. And are they not 
in this way accessary to the melting away of 
estates, and the ruin of families around them ? 
And can all this be done without violating the 
laws of humanity and equity ? Human laws may 
not be able to prevent the wrong, but the cries 
of widows and orphans will be heard in heaven, 
and a retribution which human tribunals cannot 
award, will be reserved for the day ofjudgment. 
Is it not an " evil covetousness" that rolls up an 
estate by such methods ? It is like " building a 
town with blood, and establishing a city by ini- 
quity." And can those who do thus escape ihe 
wo denounced against him, " that giveth his 
neighbor drink, that putteth his bottle to him, 
and maketh him drunken ? n 

Can it be denied that the commerce in ardent 
spirits makes a fearful havock of property, mor- 
als, and life? Does it not shed blood ai really as 
the sword, and more blcod than is shed by \ 
In this point none are better witnesses than 
physicians, and, according to their testimony, 
intemperance is one of the greatest destroyers 
of virtue, health and life. 

It is admitted that commerce generally lays a 
heavy tax upon life and morals. But it is an 
evil inseparable from a course of things which is 
actually indispensable to civilization. The en- 
tire melioration of the human condition seems to 
depend upon it, so that were commerce to cease, 
agriculture would fall back to the simple product 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 79 

of a supply without surplus, destroying the arts, 
and cutting the sinews of industry. But the 
commerce in ardent spirits stands on a different 
ground : its evils are compensated by no great i T 
good ; it promotes no good purpose which would 
not prosper liettei without it; it does not aflbrd 
property to those; who engage. in it, which they 
might not accumulate in some other way ; nor 
dors it give the least adventitious aid to agricul- 
ture, or the arts. Every thing needful to a per- 
fect s',;ite of society can exist without it; and 
with it, such a state of society can never be 
attained. It retards the accomplishment of that 
prophecy of scripture which foretells the, time, 
when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the 
earth, and violence and fraud shall cease. 

The consideration, that those, to whose injury 
we are accessary by the s.ale of ardent spirits, are 
destroyed also by the perversion of their own 
free* agency and that the evil is silent, and 
slow-paced in its march doubtless subtracts in 
no small degree, from the keen sense of ac- 
countability and crime, which would attend the 
administration of arsenic, or the taking of life by 
the pistol, or the dagger as does also the con- 
sideration, that although we may withhold the 
cup, yet, from some other source, the deleterious 
potion will be obtained. 

But all tlu's alters not the case. He who de- 
liberitely assists his neighbor to destroy his life, 
is not guiltless because his neighbor is a free 
agent and is also guilty and he is accessary to 



80 THE REMEDY 

the crime, though twenty other persons might 
have been ready to commit the same sin, if he 
had not done it. Who would sell arsenic to his 
neighbor to destroy himself, because he could 
obtain it elsewhere ? Who would sell a dagger 
for the known purpose of assassination, because, 
if it were refused, it could be purchased in 
another place ? We are accountable for our 
own wrong-doing, and liable to punishment at 
the hand of God, as really as if it had been cer- 
tain that no one would have done the deed, if 
we did not. 

The ungodliness in time, and the everlasting 
ruin in eternity, inseparable from the commerce 
in ardent spirits, proscribe it as an unlawful 
article of traffick. 

Who can estimate the hatred of God, of his 
word and worship, and of his people, which it 
occasions; or number the oaths and blasphemies 
it causes to be uttered or the violations of the 
sabbath the impurities and indecencies vio- 
lence and wrong-doing which it originates ? 
How many thousand does it detain every sab- 
bath-day from the house of God cutting them 
off from the means of grace, and hardening them 
against their efficacy ! How broad is the road 
which intemperance alone opens to hell, and 
how thronged with travellers ! 

Why is all this increase of ungodliness and 
crime ? Is not the desperate wickedness of the 
heart sufficient without artificial excitement ? If 
the commerce were inseparable from all the great 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 81 

and good ends of our social being, we might en- 
dure the evil, for the sake of the good, and they 
only he accountable who abuse themselves. But 
hiTt- is .in article of commerce spread over the 
land, whose effect is evil only, and that con- 
tinually, and whi'-Ji increases a hundred-fold 
the energies of human depravity, and the hope- 
less victims of future punishment. 

Drunkenness is a sin which excludes from 
heaven. The commerce in ardent spirits, there- 
fore, productive only of evil in time, fits for 
destruction, and turns into hell multitudes which 
no man can number. 

I am aware that in the din of business, and 
the eager thirst for gain, the consequences of 
our conduct upon our views, and the future 
destiny of our fellow men, are not apt to be 
realized, or to modify our course. 

But has not God connected with all lawful 
avocations the welfare of the life that now is, and 
of that which is to come ? And can we lawfully 
amass property by a course of trade which fills 
the land with beggars, and widows, and orphans, 
and crimes ; which peoples the grave-yard with 
premature mortality, and the world of wo with 
the victims of despair ? Could all the forms of 
evil produced in the land by intemperance, come 
upon us in one honid array it would appal the 
nation, and put an end to the traffick in ardent 
spirits. If in every dwelling built by blood, the 
stone from the wall should utter all the cries 
which the bloody traffick extorts and the beam 



82 THE REMEDY 

out of the timber should echo them back who 
would build such a house? and who would 
dwell in it ? What if in every part of the dwel- 
ling, from the cellar upward, through all the halls 
and chambers babblings, and contentions, and 
voices, and groans, and shrieks, and wailings, 
were heard, day and night ! What if the cold 
blood oozed out, and stood in drops upon the 
Avails ; and, by preternatural art, all the ghastly 
skulls and bones of the victims destroyed by in- 
temperance, should stand upon the walls, in hor- 
rid sculpture within and without the building ! 
who would rear such a building ? What if at 
eventide, and at midnight, the airy forms of men 
destroyed by intemperance, were dimly seen 
haunting the distilleries and stores, where they 
received their bane following the track of the 
ship engaged in the commerce walking upon 
the waves flitting athwart the deck sitting 
upon the rigging and sending up, from the hold 
within, and from the waves without, groans, and 
loud laments, and wuilings ! Who would attend 
such stores? Who would labor in such distil- 
leries ? Who would navigate such ships ? 

Oh ! were the sky over our heads one great 
whispering gallery, bringing down about >is all 
the lamentation and wo which intemperance 
creates, and the firm earth one sonorous medium 
of sound, bringing up around us from beneath, 
the wailings of the damned, whom the commerce 
in ardent spirits had sent thither; these tre- 
mendous realities, assailing our sense, would in- 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 83 

vigorate our conscience, and give decision to our 
purpose of reformation. But these evils are as 
real, as if the stone did cry out of the wall, and 
the beam answered it as real, as if, day and 
night, wailings were heard iu every part of the 
dwelling and blood and skeletons were seen 
upon every wall as real, as if the ghostly forms 
of departed victims flitted about the ship a.s she 
passed o'er the billows, and showed themselves 
nightly about stoics and distilleries, and with 
unearthly voices screamed in our ears their loud 
lament. They are as real, as if the sky over our 
heads collected and brought down about us all 
the notes of sorrow in the land and the firm 
earth should open a passage for the wailings of 
despair to come up from beneath. 

But it will be said, What can be done ? and 
ten thousand voices will reply, ' Nothing oh 
nothing men always have drunk to e'xcess, and 
they always will ; there is so much capital em- 
barked in the business of importation and distil- 
lation and so much supposed gain in vending 
ardent spirits and such an insatiable demand 
for them and such ability to pay for them by 
high-minded, wilful, independent freemen that 
nothing can be done.' 

Then farewell, a long farewell, to all our 
greatness ! The present abuse of ardent spirits 
has grown out of what was the prudent use of 
it, less than one hundred years ago ; then there 
was very little intemperance in the land most 
men, who drank at all, drank temperately. But 



84 THE REMEDY 

if the prudent use of ardent spirits one hundred 
years ago, has produced such results as now 
exist, what will the present intemperate use 
accomplish in a century to come ? Let no man 
turn off his eye from this suhject, or refuse to 
reason," and infer there is a moral certainty 
of a wide extended ruin, without reformation. 
The seasons are not more sure to roll, the sun 
to shine, or the rivers to flow than the present 
enormous consumption of arden* spirits is sure 
to produce the most deadly consequences to the 
nation. They will be consumed in a compound 
ratio and there is a physical certainty of the 
dreadful consequences. Have you taken the 
dimensions of the evil, its manifold and magni- 
fying miseries, its sure-paced and tremendous 
ruin ? And shall it come unresisted by prayer, 
and without a finger lifted to stay the desola- 
tion ? 

What if all men had cried out, as some did, at 
the commencement of the revolutionary struggle 
l Alf.s ! we must submit we must be taxed 
nothing can be done Oh the fleets and armies 
of England we cannot stand before them ! ! ' 
Had such counsels prevailed, we should have 
abandoned a righteous cause, and forfeited that 
aid of Heaven, for which men are always au- 
thorized to trust in God, who are disposed to do 
his will. 

Nothing can be done ! Why can nothing be 
done ? Because the intemperate will not stop 
drinking, shall the temperate keep on and be- 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 85 

come drunkards ? Because the intemperate 
cannot be reasoned with, shall tho temperate 
become madmen ? And because force will not 
avail with men of independence and property, 
does it foliow that reason, and conscience, and 
the fear of the Lord, will have no influence ? 

And because the public mind is now unen- 
lightened, and unawakeued, and unconcentrated, 
does it follow that it cannot be enlightened, and 
aroused, and concentrated in one simultaneous 
and successful effort? Reformations as much 
resisted by popular feeling, and impeded by ig- 
norance, interest, and depraved obstinacy, have 
been accomplished, through the medium of a 
rectified public opinion, and no nation ever 
possessed the opportunities and the means that 
we possess, of correctly forming the public opin- 
ion nor was a nation ever called upon to at- 
tempt it by motives of such imperious necessity. 
Our all is at stake we shall perish if we do not 
effect it. There is nothing that ought to be 
done, which a free people cannot do. 

The science of self-government is the science 
of perfect government, which we have yet to 
learn and teach, or this nation, and the world, 
must be governed by force. But we have all 
the means, and none of the impediments, which 
hinder the experiment amid the dynasties and 
feudal despotisms of Europe. And what has 
been done justifies the expectation that all 
which yet remains to be done will be accom- 
plished. The abolition of the slave trade, an 
8 



86 THE REMEDY 

event now almost accomplished, was once re- 
garded as a chimera of benevolent dreaming. 
But the band of Christian heroes, who conse- 
crated heir lives to the work, may some of them 
survive to behold it achieved. This greatest of 
evils upon earth, this stigma of human nature, 
wide-spread, deep-rooted, and intrenched by 
interest and state policy, is passing away before 
the unbending requisitions of enlightened public 
opinion. 

No great melioration of the human condition 
was ever achieved without the concurrent effort 
of numbers, and no extended, well-directed ap- 
plication of moral influence, was ever made in 
vain. Let the temperate part of the nation 
awake, and reform, and concentrate their influ- 
ence in a course of systematic action, and success 
is not merely probable, but absolutely certain. 
And cannot this be accomplished ? cannot 
the public attention be aroused, and set in array 
against the traffick in ardent spirits, and against 
their use ? With just as much certainty can the 
public sentiment be formed and put in motion, 
as the waves can be moved by the breath of 
heaven or the massy rock, balanced on the 
precipice, can be pushed from its centre of mo- 
tion ; and when the public sentiment once be- 
gins to move, its march will be as resistless as 
the same rock thundering down the precipice. 
Let no man then look upon our condition as 
hopeless, or feel, or think, or say, that nothing 
can be done. The language of Heaven to our 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 87 

happy nation is, " be it unto thee even as thou 
wilt," and there is no despondency more fatal, 
or more wicked, than that which refuses to 
hope, and to act, from the apprehension that 
nothing can be done. 



SERMON VI. 



THE REMEDY OF INTEMPERANCE. 



HABAKKUK, ii. 911, 15, 16. 

\Vo to him that cnvctcth an evil covetousness to his bouse, that 
he may set his i.est on high, that he may be delivered from the 
power of evil! Tlum linst consulted shame to thy house hy cutting 
\>fl 'in;. ii\ people, and hast slum ;d against thy soul. For the stone 
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall an- 
swer it. 

\Vo unto him that giveth his neighbor drink, that puttest thy bot- 
tle to him, and makest him diunken alsn, that thoii mayest look on 
tlit ir i.aki dness! Thou art filled with shame for plory : drink tliou 
also, aiitl lei thy foreskin he uncovered : the cup ol the LORD'S right 
hand .shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on 
tliy glory. 

LET us now take an inventory of the things 
which can be done to resist the progress of in- 
temperance. I shall set down nothing which is 
chimerical, nothing which will not commend 
itself to every man's judgment, as entirely prac- 
ticable. 

1. It is entirely practicable to extend univer- 
sal information on the subject of intemperance. 
Its nature, causes, evils, and remedy may be 
universally made known. Every pulpit and eve- 
ry newspaper in the land may be put in requisi- 
8* 



90 THE REMEDY 

tion to give line upon line, on this subject, until 
it is done. The National Tract Society may, 
with great propriety, volunteer in this glorious 
work, and send out its warning voice by winged 
messengers all over the land. And would all 
this accomplish nothing ? It would prevent the 
formation of intemperate habits in millions of 
instances, and it would reclaim thousands in 
the ear'y stages of this sin. 

2. It is practicable to form an association for 
the special purpose of superintending this great 
subject, and whose untiring energies shall be 
exerted in sending out agents to pass through 
the land, and collect information, to confer with 
influential individuals, and bodies of men, to 
deliver addresses at populajp meetings, and form 
societies auxiliary to the parent institution. 
This not only may be done, but I am persuaded 
will be done before another year shall have pass- 
ed away.* Too long have we slept. From every 
part of the land we hear of the doings of the 
destroyer, and yet the one half is not told. But 
when the facts are collected and published, will 
not the nation be moved ? It will be moved. 
All the laws of the human mind must cease, if 
such disclosures as may be made, do not pro- 
duce a great effect. 

3. Something has been done, and more may 
be done, by agricultural, commercial, and man- 

* These Discourses were composed and delivered at Lilrh- 
field, in the year 18-6: since that time the American Society 
for the Promotion of Temperance has been formed, and is now 
in successful operation. 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 91 

ufacturing establishments, in the exclusion of 
ardent spirits as an auxiliary to labor. Every 
experiment \vhir-h bus been made by capitalists 
to c\cl idt: ardent spirits and intemperance, has 
succeeded, and greatly to the profit and sat! 
lion, both of the laborer and his employer* And 
what is more natural and easy than the exten- 
sion of such 'examples by capitalists, and by 
Voluntary associations, in cities, to\vns, and 
parishes, of mechanics and farmers, whose reso- 
lutions and success may from time to time be 
published, to raise the flagging tone of hope, 
and assure the land of her own self-preserving 
powers ? Most assuredly it is not too late to 
achieve a reformation ; our hands are not bound, 
our feet are not put in fetters and the nation is 
not so fully set upon destruction, as that warn- 
ing and exertion will be in vain. It is not too 
much to be hoped, that the entire business of 
the nation, by land and by sea, shall yet move 
on without the aid of ardent spirits, and by the 
impulse alone of temperate freemen. This 
would cut off one of the most fruitful occasions 
of intemperance, and give to our morals and to 
our liberties an earthly immortality. 

The young men of our land may set glorious 
examples of voluntary abstinence from ardent 
spirits, and, by associations for that purpose, 
may array a phalanx of opposition against the 
encroachments of the destroyer; while men of 
high official standing and influence, may cheer 
us by sending down the good example of their 



92 THE REMEDY 

firmness and independence, in the abolition of 
long-established, but corrupting habits. 
' All the professions too may volunteer in this 
holy cause, and each lift up its warning voice, 
and each concentrate the power of its own bless- 
ed example. Already from all clerical meet- 
ings the use of ardent spirits is excluded ; and 
the medical profession have also commenced a 
reform in this respect which, we doubt not, will 
prevail. Nor is it to be expected that the btir r 
or the agricultural interest as represented in* 
agricultural societies, will be deficient in mag- 
nanimity and patriotic zeal, in purifying the 
morals, and perpetuating the liberties of the 
nation. A host may be enlisted against intem- 
perance which no man can number, and a moral 
power be arrayed against it, which nothing can 
resist. 

All denominations of Christians in the nation 
may with great ease be united in the effort to 
exclude the use and the commerce in ardent 
spirits. They alike feel and deplore the evil, 
and, united, have it in their power to put a stop 
to it. This union may be accomplished through 
the medium of a national society. There is no 
object for which a national society is more im- 
periously demanded, or for which it can be 
reared under happier auspices. God ^rant that 
three years may not pass away, before the entire 
land shall be marshalled, and the evils of intem- 
perance be seen like a dark cloud passing off, 
and leaving behind a cloudless day. 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 93 

The churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, of 
every name, can do much to aid in this reforma- 
tion. They ure organized to shine us lights in 
the world, and to avoid the very appearance of 
evil. A vigilant discipline is doubtless demand- 
ed in the cases of members who are of a lax and 
doubtful morality in respect to intemperance. It 
is not '-L-Migh to cut off those who are past re- 
formation, out 1 to keep those who, by close watch- 
ing, can be preserved in the use of their feet 
and tongue. JSJen who are mighty to consume 
strong drink, are unfit members of that kingdom 
which consistent npt in " ment and drink," but 
in " righteousness and pe'aee." The time, we 
trust, -is not distant, when -the' use of ardent 
spirits will be proscribed by a vote of all the 
churches in our land, and when the commerce 
in that article shall, equally with the slave trade, 
be regarded as inconsistent with a credible pro- 
fession of Christianity. All this, I have no doubt, 
can be accomplished with far less trouble than is 
now constantly cccasioned by the maintenance, 
or the neglect of discipline, in respect to cases 
of intemperance. 

The Friends, in excluding ardent spirits from 
the list of lawful articles of commerce, have 
done themselves immortal honor, and in the 
temperance of their families, and tneir thrift In 
business, have set an example which is worthy 
the admiration and imitation of all the churches 
in our land. 

When, the preceding measures have been car- 



94 THE REMEDY 

ried, something may be done by legislation, to 
discourage the distillation ana importation of 
ardent spirits, and to discountenance improper 
modes of vending them. Then, the suffrage of 
the community may be expected to put iu re- 
quisition men of talents and integrity, who, sus- 
tained by their constituents, will not hesitate to 
frame the requisite laws, and to give to them 
their salutary power. Even now there may be 
an amount of suffrage, could it be concentrated 
and expressed, to sustain laws which might go 
to li-nit the evil ; but it is scattered, it is a dis- 
persed, unorganized influence, and any effort to 
suppress intemperance by legislation, now, be- 
fore the public is prepared for an efficient co- 
operation, could terminate only in defeat. Re- 
publics must be prepared by moral sentiment for 
efficient legislation. 

Much may be accomplished to discounte- 
nance the commerce in ardent spirits, by a 
silent, judicious distribution of patronage in 
trade. 

Let that portion of the community, who would 
exile from society the traffick in ardent spirits, 
bestow their custom upon those who will agree 
to abandon it ; and a regard to interest will soon 
producfe a competition in well doing. The tem- 
perate population of a city or town are the best 
customers, and have it in their power to render 
the commerce hi ardent spirits disadvantageous 
to those who engage in it. This would throw 
an irresistible argument upon the side of refer- 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 95 

mation. There are many now who would gladly 
be released Irora the necessity of dealing in 
spirituous liquors, but they think that their 
customers Mtould not bear it. Let their sober 
customers, then, take off their iears on this hand, 
and array them on the other, and a glorious 
reformation is achieved. When the temperate 
part of the community shall not only declaim 
against mercantile establishments which thrive 
by the dissemination of moral contagion, but 
shall begin to act with a silent but determined 
discrimination, the work is done ; and can any 
conscientious man fail to make the experiment? 
" To him who knoweth to do good and doeth 
it not, to him it is sin." If we countenance 
establishments in extending and perpetuating a 
national calamity, are we not partakers in other 
men's sins? How many thousands may be 
saved from entering into temptation, and how 
many thousands rescued who have entered, if 
temperate families will give thei* custom to 
those who have abandoned the traflick in ardent 
spirits ! And to how much crime, and suffering, 
and blood, shall we be accessary, if we fail to do 
our duty in this respect ! Let every man, then, 
bestow his custom in the fear of the Lord, and 
as he expects to give an account with joy or 
grief, of the improvement or neglect of that 
powerful means of effecting moral good. 

When all these preliminary steps have been 
taken, petitions may be addressed to the Legis- 
latures of the States and to Congress, by all 



96 THE REMEDY 

denominations, each under their own proper 
name, praying for legislative interference to pro- 
tect the health and morals of the nation. This 
will call to the subject the attention of the ablest 
men in the nation, and enable them to touch 
some of the springs of general action with com- 
pendious energy. They can jeach the causes 
of disastrous action, when the public sentiment 
will bear, them out in it, and can introduce prin- 
ciples which, like the great law* of nature, will, 
with silent simplicity, reform and purify the land. 
And now, could my voice be extended through 
the land, to all orders and descriptions of men, 
I would " cry aloud and spare not." To the 
watchmen upon Zion's walls appointed to an- 
nounce the approach of danger, and to say unto 
the wicked man, " thou shalt surely die" I 
would say can we hold our peace, or withhold 
the influence of our example in such an emer- 
gency as this, and be guiltless of blood ? Are 
we not called upon to set examples of entire 
abstinence ? How otherwise shall we be able- 
to preach against intemperance,- and reprove, 
rebuke, and exhort ? Talk not of " habit," and 
of " prudent use," and a little for the " stomach's 
sake." This is the way in which men become 
drunkards. Our security and our influence de- 
mand immediate and entiie abstinence. If 
nature would receive a shock by such a refor- 
mation, it proves that it has already been too 
long delayed, and can safely be deferred no 
longer. 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 97 

To the churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
whom he hath purchased with his blood, that he 
might redeem them from all iniquity, and purify 
tlu-in to himself, a peculiar people I would say 
Beloved in the Lord, the world hath need of 
your purified example ; for who will make a 
stand against the encroachments of intemperance, 
if professors of religion will not ? Will you not, 
then, abstain from the use of it entirely, and exile 
it from your families ? Will you not watch over 
one another with keener vigilance aud lift an 
earlier note of admonition and draw tighter the 
bands of brotherly discipline and with a more 
determined fidelity, cut off those whom admo- 
nition cannot reclaim ? Separate, brethren, be- 
tween the precious and the vile, the living and 
the dead, and burn incense between them, that 
the plague may be stayed. 

To the physicians of the land I would cry for 
help, in this attempt to stay the march of ruin. 
Beloved men possessing our confidence "by 
your skill, and our hearts by your assiduities in 
seasons of alarm and distress combine, I be- 
seech you, and exert, systematically and vigo- 
rously, the mighty power you possess on this 
subject, over the national understanding and 
will. Beware of planting the seed* of intempe- 
rance in the course of your professional labors, 
but become our guardian angels to conduct us 
in the paths of health and of virtue. Fear not 
the consequence of fidelity in admonishing your 
patients, when diseased by intemperance, of the 
9 



98 THE REMEDY 

cause, and the remedy of their malady : and 
whenever one of you shall be rejected for your 
faithfulness, and another be called in to prophesy 
smooth things, let all the 'intemperate, and all 
the land know, that in the whole nation there 
are no false prophets among physicians, who, for 
filthy lucre, will cry peace to their intemperate 
patients, when there is no peace to them, but in 
reformation. Will you not speak out on this 
subject in all your medical societies, and provide 
tracts sanctioned by your high professional au- 
thority, to be spread over the laud ? 

Ye magistrates, to whom the law has confi- 
ded the discretionary power of giving li 
for the vending of ardent spirits, and the sword 
for the punishment of the violations of law 
though you alone could not resist the burning 
tide, yet, when the nation is moved with fear, 
and is putting in requisition her energies to 
strengthen your hands will you not stand up 
to your duty, and do it fearlessly and firmly ? 
No class of men in the community possess as 
much direct power as you possess, and, when 
sustained by public sentiment, your official in- 
fluence and authority may be made irresistible. 
Hemember, then, your designation by Heaven to 
office for this self-same thing ; and, as you 
would maintain a conscience void of offence, 
and give up to God a joyful account be faith- 
ful. Through you, let the violated law speak 
out and righteousness and peace become the 
stability of our times. 



OP INTEMPERANCE. 99 

To the governments of the states Vid of the 
nation, appointed to see to it, " that the com- 
monwealth receives no detriment," while they 
facilitate and guide the energies of a free peo- 
ple, and protect the boundless result." of indus- 
try--I would say Beloved men and highly 
honored, how ample and how enviable are your 
opportunities of doing good and how trivial, 
and contemptible, and momentary, are the in- 
sults of civil policy merely, while moral prin- 
ciple, that main-spring of the soul, is impaire^l 
and destroyed by crime. Under the auspices 
of the national and state governments, science, 
commerce, agriculture and the arts flourish, and 
our wealth flows in like the waves of the sea. 
But where is the wisdom of filling up by a thou- 
sand streams the reservoir of national wealth, to 
be poured out again by as many channels of 
profusion and crime ? Colleges are reared and 
multiplied by public munificence, while acade- 
mies and common schools enlighten the land. 
But to what purpose when a single crime sends 
up exhalations enough to eclipse half the stars 
and suns destined to enlighten our ii.oral hemi- 
sphere, before they have reached their meri- 
dian. 

The medical profession is patronised, and 
ought to be ; and the standard of medical at- 
tainment is lising. But a single crime, unre- 
sisted, throws into the distance all the achieve- 
ments of art, and multiplies disease and death 
much faster than the improvements in medical 



100 THE REMEDY 

science can multiply the means of preventing 
them. 

The improvements by steam and by canals 
augment the facilities and the motives to nation- 
al industry. But, while intemperance rages and 
increases, it is only to pour the tide of wealth 
into one mighty vortex which swallows it up, 
and, with a voice of thunder, and the insatiable 
desire of the grave, cries, Give, give ; and saith 
not, It is enough. 

Republican institutions are guarantied to the 
states, and the whole nation watches with sleep- 
less vigilance the altar of liberty. But a mighty 
despot, whose army is legion, has invaded the 
land carrying in his course taxation, and chains, 
and fire, and the rack insomuch that the whole 
land bleeds and groans at every step of his iron 
foot at every movement of his massy sceptre 
at every pulsation of his relentless heart. And 
yet in daylight and at midnight he stalks unmo- 
lested while his myrmidons with infernal joy 
are preparing an ocean of blood in which our 
sun may set never to rise. 

The friends of the Lord and his Christ, with 
laudable enterprise, are rearing temples to Je- 
hovah, and extending his word and ordinances 
through the land, while the irreligious influence 
of a single crime balances, or nearly balances, 
the entire account. 

And now, ye venerable and honorable men, 
raised to seats of legislation in a nation which is 
the freest, and is destined to become the great- 



OF INTEMPERAN'CE. 101 

est, and may become the happiest upon earth 
can you, will you behold unmoved the march 
of this mighty evil ? Shall it mine in darkness, 
and lift fearlessly its giant form in daylight and 
deliberately <!ii!, ilie grave of our liberties and 
entomb thy last hope of enslaved nations and 
nothing be done by the national government 
to stop the destroyer ? With the concurrent aid 
of an enlightened public sentiment, you possess 
the power of a most eflicacious legislation ; and, 
by your example and inlluence, you of all men 
possess the best opportunities of forming a cor- 
rect and irresistible public sentiment on the side 
of temperance. Much power to you is given to 
check and extirpate this evil, and to roll down 
to distant ages, broader, and deeper, aud purer, 
the streams of national prosperity. Save us by 
your wisdom and firmness, save us by your own 
example, and, " as in duty bound, we will ever 
pray." 

Could I call around me in one vast assembly 
the temperate young men of our land, I would 
say Hopes of the nation, blessed be ye of the 
Lord now in the dew of your youth. But look 
well to your footsteps : for vipers, and scorpions, 
and adders, surround your way look at the 
generation who have just preceded you, the 
morning of their life was cloudless, and it dawn- 
ed as brightly as your own but behold them 
bitten, swollen, enfeebled, inflamed, debauched, 
idle, poor, irreligious, and vicious, with halting 
step dragging onward to meet an early grave ! 
9* 



102 THE REMEDY 

Their bright prospects are clouded, and their 
sun is set never to rise. No house of their own 
receives them, while from poorer to poorer tene- 
ments they descend, and to harder and harder 
fare, as improvidence dries up their resources. 
And now, who are those that wait on their foot- 
steps with muffled faces and sable garments ? 
That is a father and that is a mother whose 
grey hairs are coming with sorrow to the grave. 
That is a sister, weeping over evils which she 
cannot arrest and there is the broken-hearted 
wife and there are the children hapless inno- 
cents for whom their father Las provided the 
inheritance only of dishonor, and nakedness, 
and wo. And is this, beloved young men, the 
history of your course in, this scene of desola- 
tion, do you behold the image of your future 
selves is this the poverty and disease, which as 
an armed man shall take hold on you and are 
your fathers, and mothers, and sister"., and wives, 
and children, to succeed to those who now move 
on in this mournful procession weeping as they 
go ? Yes bright as your morning now opens, 
and high as your hopes beat, this is your Tioon-, 
and your night, unless you shun those habits of 
intemperance which have thus early made theirs 
a day of clouds, and of th'.ck darkness. If you 
frequent places of evening resort for social drink- 
ing if you set out with drinking, daily, a little, 
temperately, prudently, it is yourselves which, 
as in a glass, you beliold. 

Might I select specific objects of address to 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 103 

the young husbandman or mechanic I would 
say Happy man your employment is useful, 
and honorable, and with temperance and in- 
dustry you rise to competence, and rear up 
around you a happy family, and trunsii.it to 
them, :is a precious legacy, your own fair fame. 
But look around you ; are there none who 
\\ere once in your condition, whose health, and 
reputation, and substance, are gone ? . What 
would tempt you to exchange conditions ? And 
yet, sure as seed-time and harvest, if you drink 
daily, at stated times, and visit from evening to 
evening the resorts of social drinking, or stop 
to take refreshment as you enter or retire from 
the city, town, or village, yours will become the 
condition of those ruined farmers and artisans 
around you. 

To another I would say You are a man of 
wealth, and may drink to the extinction of life, 
without the risk of impoverishment but look 
at your neighbor, his bloated face, and inflamed 
eye, and blistered lip, and trembling hand he 
too is a man of wealth, and may die of intem- 
perance without the fear of poverty. 

Do yoxi demand, " what have I to do with 
such examples ?" Nothing if you take warn- 
ing by them. But if you too should cleave to 
the morning bitter, and the noon-tide drarn, and 
the evening beverage, you have in these signals 
of ruin the memorials of your own miserable 
end ; for the same causes, in the same circum- 
stances, will produce the same effects. 



104 THE REMEDY 

To the affectionate husband I would say 
Behold the wife of thy bosom, young and beau- 
tiful as the morning and yet her day may be 
overcast with clouds, and all thy early hopes be 
blasted. Upon her the fell destroyer may lay 
his hand, and plant in that healthful frame the 
seeds of disease, and transmit to successive gen- 
erations the inheritance of crime and wo. Will 
you not watch over her with ever-wakeful affec- 
tion and keep far from your abode the occasions 
of temptation and ruin ? Call around you the 
circle of your healthful and beautiful children. 
Will you bring contagion into such a circle as 
this? Shall those sparkling eyes become in- 
flamed those rosy cheeks purpled and bloated 
that sweet breath be tainted those ruby lips 
blistered and that vital tone of unceasing cheer- 
fulness be turned into tremour and melancholy ? 
Shall those joints so compact be unstrung that 
dawning intellect beclouded those affectionate 
sensibilities benumbed, and those capacities for 
holiness and heaven be filled with sin, and 
" fitted for destruction ?" Oh thou father, was 
it for this that the Son of God shed his blood 
for thy precious offspring that, abandoned and 
even tempted by thee, they should destroy them- 
selves, and pierce thy heart with many sorrow s ; 
Wouldst thou let the wolf into thy sheep-fold 
among the tender lambs wouldst thou send thy 
flock to graze about a den of lions ? Close, 
then, thy doors against a more ferocious de- 
stroyer and withhold the footsteps of thy im- 



OP INTEMPERANCE! 105 

mortal progeny from places of resort more dan- 
gerous than the lion's den. Should a serpent 
of vast dimensions surprise, in the. iield one of 
your little, group, and wreath about liis body his 
cold, elastic folds* tightening with every yielding 
breath his deadly gripe, how would his cries 
pierce your soul and his strained eye-balls, and 
convulsive agonies, and imploring hands, add 
wings to your feet, and supernatural strength to 
your arms ! But in this case you could ap- 
proach with hope to his rescue. The keen edge 
of steel might sunder the elastic fold, and rescue 
the victim, who, the moment he is released, 
breathes freely, and is well again. But the ser- 
pent intemperance twines about the body of 
your child a deadlier gripe, and extorts a keener 
cry of distress, and mocks your effort to relieve 
him by a fibre which no steel can sunder. Like 
Laocoon^you can only look on while bone after 
bone of your child is crushed, till his agonies are 
over, and his cries are hushed in death. 

And now, to every one whose eye has passed 
over these pages I would say Resolve upon 
reformation by entire abstinence, before you 
close the book. 

While the argument is clear, and the impres- 
sion of it is fresh, and your judgment is con- 
vinced, and your conscience is awake, be per- 
suaded, not almost, but altogether. The present 
moment may be the one which decides your 
destiny forever. As you decide now upon ab- 
stinence, or continued indulgence, so may your 



106 THE 11EMBD7 

character be, through time and through eternity. 
Resolve also instantly to exclude ardent spirits 
from your family, and put out of sight the me- 
morials of past folly and danger. And if for 
medicinal purposes you retain ardent spirits in 
your house, let it be among other drugs, 
labelled, " Touch not, taste not, handle not." 

As you would regulate your conduct by th;; 
Gospel, and give up your last account with joy, 
weigh well the arguments for abandoning the 
traffick in ardent spirits as unlawful in the sight 
of God. And "if thy right hand oft'end i. 
cut it off. If thy right eye offend thee, , luck it 
out." Talk not of loss and gain <V who can 
answer for the blood of souls ? and k - what shall 
it profit a man, if he gain the whole world and 
lose his OTrn soul ? rt *' Wo to him that coveteth 
an evil covetousness to his house, that he may 
set his nest on high, that he may be delivered 
from the power of evil ! Thou hast consulted 
shame to thy house by cutting off many people, 
and hast sinned against thy soul. For the stone 
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of 
the timber shall answer it. Wo to him that 
buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a 
city by iniquity ! Behold, is it not of the Lord 
of hosts that the people shall labor in the very 
fire, and the people shall weary themselves for 
very vanity ?" 

Let the discourses upon the causes and symp- 
toms of intemperance be read aloud in your 
family, at least once a year that the deceitful 



OF INTEMPERANCE. 107 

dreadful evil may not fasten un perceived, his 
iron i;ripe on youix-lf, > any of your household 
and tint, if one shall not perceive his d 
another n..iy, and ^ive the timely \\arning. 
Thousaii' may he k'-pl hack Iroin 

destruction, by the simple survey of the causes 
and svmptoms of Intemperance. And, 

Finally, when you have secured your own 
household let your benevolence extend to those 
around you. Become in your neighborhood, 
and throughout the whole extent of your inter- 
S ::nd influence, a humble, affectionate, de- 
termined reformer. It is to little purpose that 
the causes, symptoms, e\ ils, and remedy of 
intemperance have been disclosed, if this little 
volume be left to work its obscure and dilatory 
way through the land: but if e\er\ one who 
approves of it will aid its circulation, it may find 
a place yet in every family, and save millions 
from temporal and eternal ruin. 

I pant not for fame or posthumous immortali- 
ty, but my heart's desire and prayer to God for 
my countrymen is, that they may be saved from 
intemperance, and that our beloved nation may 
continue free, and become great and good. 



