IN MEMO1RIAM 
Henry Byron Phillips 




Tranh Ji $toit.. 



TWENTY-SIX YEARS OF 

MISSIONARY WORK 
IN CHINA 



BY 

GRACE STOTT 

OF THE CHINA INLAND MISSION 
WITH A PREFACE BY 

THE REV. ]. HUDSON TAYLOR 



WITH EIGHT ILLUSTRATIONS 



SECOND EDITION 



NEW YORK 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY 

10 EAST 23RD STREET 

1897 







" For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ : for it is 
the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth ; 
to the Jew first, and also to the Greek." ROM. i. 16. 



PREFACE 

THE work of God recorded in these pages is no 
longer an experiment, and it is well that Mrs. 
Stott has been able, during her furlough, to put in 
more permanent form some of the incidents which 
many of us have heard with deepest interest from her 
own lips in missionary meetings, or on more private 
occasions. 

It has been my privilege to be acquainted with this 
work from its commencement. With earnest prayer 
I commended Mr. Stott to God for his difficult 
journey, for in those times Wunchau was not a free 
port, and the eight days' overland travel through 
unknown and mountainous country would have been 
somewhat formidable for a good walker, while for 
one on crutches it was much more so. He left Scot- 
land, however, believing that " the lame should take 
the prey," and he was spared to do so to no small 
extent. 

I had visited Mr. Stott during his early labours 
there, and seen how much he needed domestic help, 
and how handicapped he was in the charge of his 
boys' boarding-school, before I had the pleasure of 

iii 

580:508 



iv PREFACE 

welcoming Miss Ciggie (whom I had known in Glas- 
gow) on her arrival in China, twenty-six years ago, to 
become his wife. 

Having closely followed the progress of the work 
through these twenty-five years, and having paid my 
last visits to Wunchau since Mrs. Stott left, it was 
with special interest and pleasure that I snatched 
time to read most of her manuscript. It is empha- 
tically a story of work earnest, persevering work 
which God has blessed : an unvarnished account, 
it brings out clearly the lights and shades of mis- 
sionary service. 

I did not find one dull paragraph. Those who 
begin to read the book will want to finish it, and it 
cannot fail to be a blessing to the reader. 

It is an unfinished record, and, since Mrs. Stott 
asked me to write a few lines of preface, a joyful 
letter from Miss Christabel Williams tells of the 
conversion of sixteen of the twenty-six girls in the 
boarding-school : four of the children were previously 
converted, and several of the remaining six the 
little ones of the school were seeking the Lord. 

May many readers be led to pray for the work and 
workers in Wunchau ! 

J. HUDSON TAYLOR. 
CHINA INLAND MISSION, 
NEWINGTON GREEN, LONDON, N. 
January, 1897. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER I. 

PAGE 

Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men." MATT. iv. 19 i 



CHAPTER II. 
" In due season we shall reap, if we faint not." GAL. vi. 9 . 10 

CHAPTER III. 

" They that make them are like unto them ; so is every one that 
trusteth in them." PSA. cxv. 8. . . . .20 

CHAPTER IV. 

" They imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able 
to perform." PSA. xxi. n . . . .35 

CHAPTER V. 

" Our Lord is above all gods." PSA. cxxxv. 5 . . .52 

v 



vi CONTENTS 

CHAPTER VI. 

PAGE 

" And He said unto them, Lacked ye anything ? And they said, 
Nothing." LUKE xxii. 35 . . . .68 

CHAPTER VII. 

" If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and 
take up his cross daily, and follow Me." LUKE ix. 23 . 83 

CHAPTER VIII. 

" Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain 
thing ? " PSA. ii. I . . . . .98 

CHAPTER IX. 
" And ye shall be witnesses unto Me." ACTS i. 8 , .114 

CHAPTER X. 

" How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of 
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things !" ROM. x. 15 129 

CHAPTER XI. 

" When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee ; 
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee." 
ISA. xliii. 2 . . . . . . .145 

CHAPTER XII. 

" The memory of the just is blessed." PROV. x. 7 . .160 



CONTENTS vii 

CHAPTER XIII. 

PAGE 

" He will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry ; 
when He shall hear it, He will answer thee." ISA. xxx. 19 176 

CHAPTER XIV. 

" And both Jesus was called, and His disciples, to the marriage." 
JOHN ii. 2 . . . . . . .197 

CHAPTER XV. 

" And the common people heard Him gladly." MARK xii. 37 . 213 

CHAPTER XVI. 

'In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold 
not thine hand : for thou knowest not whether shall 
prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall 
be alike good." ECCLES. xi. 6 . . . . 226 

CHAPTER XVII. 

" Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy." JOHN xvi. 20 . .... 241 

CHAPTER XVI II. 

" All Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord ; and Thy saints 
shall bless Thee." PSA. cxlv. 10. . . . . 258 

CHAPTER XIX 
" The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." LUKE x. 9 . 266 

CHAPTER XX. 

" In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence." PROV. xiv. 26 . 288 



viii CONTENTS 

CHAPTER XXI. 

PAGE 

"Thy expectation shall not be cut off." PROV. xxiv. 14 . . 300 

CHAPTER XXII. 

" Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus 
Christ." -2 TIM. ii. 3 . . . . .314 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

"Both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice 
together." JOHN iv. 36 . . . . 330 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

" Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have 
no more that they can do." LUKE xii. 4 . . 345 

CHAPTER XXV. 

'' I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because Thou didst it." 
PSA. xxxix. 9. " As for God, His way is perfect." 2 SAM. 
xxii. 31 355 



CHAPTER I 

" Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men." MATT. iv. 19 

MY first interest in China began in the spring 
of 1865 when Mr. Hudson Taylor, accom- 
panied by Mr. (now Dr.) Barchet and his companion, 
visited Glasgow. The two latter were en route for 
China, sailing in a few days, and Mr. Taylor had 
come to wish them good-bye and God-speed. They 
addressed a small meeting, and as I listened to Mr. 
Taylor's tale of the darkness of China and the 
terrible need of workers there, there came a question 
that would be answered, " Why may not you go to 
tell of a Saviour's love ? " 

I had been converted four years, and had begun in 
a feeble way to serve the Lord who had bought me 
at first by tract distribution, then Sunday-school 
teaching. The Lord had often also graciously used 
me to lead many an anxious soul into the light, but 
up to this time I had never thought of mission work, 
never supposed I had any call beyond my native city 
of Glasgow. 



CHINA 



For days this question kept ringing in my heart. 
I had no home ties, it was true ; but was I fit ? Then, 
too, at that time I had never heard of a young girl 
going to a heathen land was it practicable ? This 
latter question I decided to ask Mr. Taylor. He saw 
no reason why I should not go, even though but 
twenty years of age, if called of God, and if called, 
surely the fitness would be given by Him. 

After much prayer and consideration, Mr. Taylor 
invited me to go to London, that by mutual prayer 
and knowledge of one another, God's way might be 
made clear. I arrived just the day before Mr. and 
Mrs. Stevenson's marriage. They and Mr. Stott, 
whom I then met for the first time, sailed three 
weeks afterwards for China. 

Mr. Stott had been brought up to farm work, 
but when he was about nineteen years of age he 
slipped on the road and knocked his knee against 
a stone. This simple accident resulted in white 
swelling, which, two years later, necessitated the am- 
putation of the left leg. For nine months he lay a 
helpless invalid, and it was during this time that the 
Lord graciously saved his soul. So far he had been 
careless and indifferent to the love of God in Christ 
Jesus, but now, in his helpless condition, and what 
seemed his ruined future, how precious that love 
became ! After his recovery he began to teach in a 
school, and had been thus employed several years 



"FOLLOW ME" 3 

when he first heard of China's needs through a friend, 
who himself was going out. 

In accepting Mr. Stott for mission work, Mr. 
Taylor manifested that faith which has so eminently 
characterised him, for surely no Society would have 
sent a lame man to such a country to pioneer work, 
and Mr. Stott often referred with gratitude to Mr. 
Taylor's acceptance of him. When asked why he, 
with only one leg, should think of going to China, 
his remark was, " I do not see those with two legs 
going, so I must." As I saw them slowly sail out 
of the docks a great hope welled up in my heart 
that I should soon follow, though at that time I 
little thought that my life and work would be 
blended with his. 

I continued in London a few months, when it was 
definitely settled that I should accompany Mr. and 
Mrs. Taylor and party, who were to sail the following 
May. Almost as soon as that decision was arrived 
at my health began to give way, though up to that 
time I scarce remember one day of sickness. After 
trying several places, with the vain hope my illness 
might prove a temporary weakness, and that I might 
still be able to go forward, the doctors gave it as their 
definite decision that I ought not to go to China at 
present. Mr. Taylor reluctantly communicated this 
decision to me, but added, " I hope you will be able to 
follow us in a year." This news was a great blow to 



4 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

me ; I had thought I was willing, for God's will only, 
that I would be content to go or stay, just as He 
called; but when the word came "stay" I was bitterly 
disappointed. This led to much heart searching : for 
the first time I saw how easy it was to deceive one- 
self, and night after night I cried to God to save me 
from self-deception. 

One night, when on my knees, with tearful con- 
fession of self-will, it seemed as if I heard a voice 
saying, "If you still want to serve me go back to 
Glasgow, and take my messages to the Salt Market 
and the district round about." My heart almost stood 
still : the Salt Market was one of the vilest and 
most wicked places in Glasgow, inhabited almost 
exclusively by thieves and women of ill-repute. It 
was hardly fit for a man to go into such a place 
could it be God was sending a young girl there, 
uncalled by man, unprotected, and without means 
of support could that be God's will for me? I 
knelt in silence ; I dare not speak. I had had one 
lesson in self-will, and dared not say " No," while I 
feared to say " Yes." At last the answer came, " Yes 
Lord ; if Thou wilt go with me every step of the 
way." I then told the Lord that as I could not go 
alone I should refuse to go any day I did not feel 
His presence and power with me. From that hour 
strength seemed slowly to return. Meantime arrange- 
ments were being made for the sailing of the 



"FOLLOW ME" 5 

Lammermuir party. I offered to remain a few weeks 
and help with the outfits. 

About a fortnight before the ship sailed, one of 
the party withdrew through the illness of her mother. 
Passages had been paid, and unless another took 
her place the money would be lost. Mr. Taylor 
turned to me : I had been getting stronger was 
it not possible that God, having made me willing 
to stay, was now opening the way for me to go ? 
To Mr. Taylor it almost appeared so. I prayed, 
but could get no light ; it seemed as if the Lord, 
having given me His orders, would hear nothing 
more on the subject, so I had to say, " I can't go," 
even though it almost broke my heart to say the word. 

The Lammermuir sailed on May 26, 1866, and 
as I watched her towed slowly out from the docks 
I felt China must be left behind for the present, 
Mr. Taylor's home was broken up the day they left, 
but friends had kindly invited me to spend a few 
days with them previous to returning to Glasgow, 
and it was here I had my first lesson in faith. The 
friend who had been as a mother to me after my 
grandmother's death had died during my stay in 
London. I had, therefore, no home to return to. I 
had paid all my incidental personal expenses, and 
never having referred to money matters, friends must 
have supposed I had plenty, but in fact I only had 
just enough to take me by rail to Glasgow. Wishing 



6 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

to have a few shillings in my pocket, by which to 
obtain lodgings, I wanted to go by steamer, that being 
the cheaper way. Friends tried to dissuade me, not 
knowing my reason; the expenses were figured up 
and after removal of luggage, &c., &c., I found I would 
save but 45. 6d., and they urged it was not worth 
taking so long a journey for that sum. I had been 
asked to visit a young lady on that day, and was about 
to write a note to say that, leaving by steamer, I 
could not keep my engagement, when the thought 
came to me, could I not give up that 43. 6d. for the 
Lord's sake ? Perhaps He had some service for me 
to do, or I might interest her in China, so I decided 
to go by the night train and keep my engagement. 
We had a time of sweet fellowship together, and, 
when leaving, she pressed a small packet into my 
hand, saying, "Take this as from Him." When I 
opened it there was exactly 43. 6d. inside. Oh, how 
strengthened and helped I was by that simple act 
It seemed as if God had said, " Do not doubt ; I will 
care for you." 

I had never heard of living by faith, and if asked 
could hardly have told the meaning of the words ; 
but I did know if an earthly master sent his 
servant to do some special work for him, he would 
at least see that he had enough to eat, and I dared 
not think my heavenly Father would treat His 
child worse than that, so I was " without carefulness " 



"FOLLOW ME" 7 

in this matter. I had learned to use my needle well, 
and thought I might help to support myself in that 
way. Having some warm Christian friends, I had no 
doubt that if I told them I wanted needlework they 
would be sure to let me have some, and for the rest the 
Lord would provide. My business was to do His will. 
On my return to Glasgow I was still far from 
strong, but gave from ten till two daily in visiting 
the poor degraded outcasts of Salt Market district. 
No needlework offered, my Father seeing I was too 
weak to do anything more than the daily visiting. 
I soon learned why God had sent me in this way, 
for almost the first questions fiercely asked were : 
"What Church has sent you here?" "No Church. 
" Who has sent you ? " " No one." " Are you not 
paid for coming?" "No." "Then why do you 
come ? " " Because I love you ; I have been saved 
myself, and I want you to be saved too." And when 
they found that I was not only willing to read with 
and pray for them, but to nurse poor sick ones, kindle 
a fire, make beef tea, or sweep a hearth if need be, 
beside nursing their babies, both hearts and homes 
were opened to me at once. At first the elders of 
the Church to which I belonged were uneasy at so 
young a girl going into dens of such wretchedness, 
and one elderly man warned me of the dangers to 
which I was exposing myself, and feared that evil 
might befall me ; but I felt that was God's business. 



8 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

He had sent me, and He was responsible, and never 
during the three and a half years I laboured amongst 
them did I receive the least insult or hear unbecoming 
language if they knew I was present. 

After three months, during which time God had 
provided for all my wants in a remarkable manner, 
sending money from whence I did not know, so that I 
had lacked nothing, I was one day asked to speak with 
a few of the elders. They said they thought perhaps 
God had called me, and they would like a share in the 
work would I accept a small sum from them weekly ? 
I told them I could not be put under any rule what- 
ever ; I had to feel my way to depend on God for 
wisdom by the hour, and must work just when and 
how I could ; that if their money would mean being 
under their control, I must decline ; but if they would 
like to help, no matter in how small a sum, leaving 
me quite free, I would rejoice in their fellowship. 
From that hour, until I left for China, three and a 
half years afterwards, they stood by me, helping me 
on, but never interfering. In this way the Lord 
supplied all my wants. 

It was not long before I began to see that I 
was the one God wanted to train through these 
means. I had all my life had a hatred and dread 
of sin and sinners. A bad person filled me with 
disgust, and it was not till I was sent down there 
among the utterly lost that I began to separate be- 



" FOLLOW ME" 9 

tween sin and the sinner, and while hating the one 
to love the other. They had human hearts, and 
readily responded to the touch of love, and I felt 
circumstances and God's grace alone had made me 
to differ. During that time, so far as I knew, only 
two had been converted, but God had put His child 
into His own school, and He was teaching her lessons 
that would have to be lived out when He gave her 
her life's work. Never, never shall I cease to give 
God thanks for those years of contact with sin and 
for the faith lessons learned there, yet during all the 
time I never once lost the consciousness that my life's 
work lay in China, and I had but to wait His time. 



CHAPTER II 

*' In due season we shall reap, if we faint not." GAL. vi. 9. 

IN the meantime, Mr. Stott had, after eighteen 
months spent in the neighbourhood of Ning-po, 
acquiring that dialect, gone to Wenchow, arriving 
there in November, 1867. He met with but scant 
courtesy. For three months he and Mr. Jackson, 
who had accompanied him from Tai-chow, lived in 
an inn. All feared them, and no one would rent a 
house to the hated foreigner. Again and again 
negotiations were almost complete, when the money 
would be returned and the weary search begin again. 
At last a man of some influence, who had brought 
himself to despair by opium-smoking and gambling, 
offered a house, and was bold enough to brave all 
the consequences. Mr. Stott moved there as quietly 
as possible, but next day the news had spread, and 
a large angry crowd assembled, determined to turn 
him out They battered in the gate, bent on mischief. 
Mr. Stott came out and stood before them, and said, 
" You see I am a lame man ; if I wanted to run 



"IN DUE SEASON" 11 

away from you I could not ; if you kill me you will, 
perhaps, get into trouble ; if you let me alone you 
will find I shall do no harm ; anyhow, I have come 
and mean to stay." They were taken aback by his 
quiet, strong words, and contenting themselves by 
throwing a few stones they dispersed and left him in 
peace 

As soon as possible he tried to begin a boys' 
school, and thought to induce regular attendance by 
providing them with a mid-day meal. A fair number 
attended, and they seemed to have made a good start, 
when one day, going into the schoolroom, he found 
the teacher, but no boys. He asked the meaning of 
it all, and was told that a report had spread abroad 
that he was inveigling children in on purpose to take 
out their hearts and liver to compound into medicine, 
and their parents were afraid to expose their children 
to such terrible dangers. No respectable person would 
take the position of servant, and so weary months 
had to be passed alone, in the midst of many 
dangers and discomforts, before confidence was 
fairly won. 

Over two years he laboured alone, and for more 
than a year of that time never saw an English 
face, or ever heard a word of the English language, 
for from the time he arrived in Wenchow, in 
November, 1867, until he left, in February, 1870, to 
meet me, he had never left the city for a single night. 



12 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

By that time he had established his boys' boarding 
school and had twelve boys entirely under his care ; 
but only two men in the city had been baptized, and 
they proved disappointments in after years. 

How much of his time was spent during these 
two years is given in a letter to a friend, written 
in 1869. He says, "My household consists of twelve 
boys, schoolmaster, my own teacher, two servant 
men, and an old washerwoman : if I rule them as I 
ought, it is well, but that is an open question. I 
shall give you a short account of how I spend my 
time. Getting up in the morning at six o'clock, 
meditation, prayer, and breakfast over, I have a 
short lecture or exposition in the school, and 
prayers ; then the needs of the family have to be 
examined and provided for, such as buying rice, vege- 
tables, fish and firewood, needles, buttons, shoes, &c, 
the size, number, quality of each having to be decided 
upon. Marketing done, I go to my study, and prepare 
discourses for Sundays and evenings, or attend to any 
important visitor, ever seeking an opportunity of tell- 
ing him of the true God, of sin, and salvation. After 
dinner I resume study, receive visitors, or ride out in 
the country, taking with me a few tracts, and find an 
opportunity to speak a word for Christ Jesus, for I 
dare not yet venture to preach in the streets. By the 
time I get home the boys are out of school, and then 
I have to keep them busy and out of mischief till 



"IN DUE SEASON" 13 

supper-time, which takes place after dark. This over 
we have some recreation, recital of some tale from 
memory, or exhibition of pictures, with some music 
until ' prayer time/ when a few friends join us, when 
all who can, read the Scriptures verse about, then a 
short address, and close with prayer. After comes 
the children's question time, then I try to stretch 
their intellect as soon as it offers to peep out, and to 
foster it where it does not exist. My health is perfect ; 
the climate agrees with me very well ; sometimes I am 
in good spirits, and sometimes I have the dumps, and 
think hard things of everything and everybody, myself 
included. You cannot understand my position till 
you have been two years and more tied to your post, 
eight days' journey from the nearest settlement ; yet, 
if any one would give me my choice to-day of any 
position, I could only say * Wenchow.' I would not 
change it, if I could, to rule a nation." 

After three and a half years' labour in the slums of 
Glasgow, my health being restored, I felt the time had 
come for me to go forth to China, and having in the 
meantime become engaged to Mr. Stott, I was sent 
out by the CI.M. to share his labours, to be as far 
as possible a helpmeet to him. 

I sailed alone from London in the sailing ship 
Kai-sow, on December 4, 1869, and prepared for 
the usual four months' journey. A few days after, 
I laughingly said to the captain, " I want to get 



I 4 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

into Shang-hai on the I2th of March." He thought 
a moment and answered, " Not likely ; if we do, it 
will be one of the fastest voyages on record. But," 
he asked, " why on the I2th of March ? " I answered, 
" I had a fancy to get in on my birthday." 

The captain was a kind and good man, and his 
influence was so felt over the ship that during that 
long voyage I never heard a word a lady might not 
hear from those sailors. He also encouraged me 
with meetings with the men, and as we had a pretty 
fair voyage, I was able to have one twice a week with 
them, nearly all the time. Two or three professed to 
receive blessing, but I do not know if they stood the 
test of after years. The captain and his dear wife 
became life-long friends. In the Chinese seas we had 
a terrific storm, and as I had often longed to witness 
a real storm at sea, the captain jokingly said that he 
was sure I had prayed for this ; the only consolation 
he had was, that we could not now reach Shang-hai 
on the 1 2th of March. Nevertheless we anchored at 
Woo-sung on the eve of the I ith, and on the I2th, my 
twenty-fifth birthday, we arrived in Shang-hai. Mr. 
Stott met me there, and took me on to Ning-po, where 
I was kindly welcomed by Dr. Lord. According to 
Consular regulations then, I had to wait a month 
before we could be married, and on the 26th of April, 
1870, we were made one in life, as we already were in 
heart. The day after our wedding, the cook Mr. 



" IN DUE SEASON " 15 

Stott had brought with him from Wenchow was 
baptized on profession of his faith. 

It was my husband's desire to return at once to 
Wenchow to his work, but nearly three weeks passed 
before he could find a junk to take us down. The 
coast was infested at that time with pirates, and junks 
were afraid to sail unless in fleets, under the protec- 
tion of a war junk. At last we sailed, and as we had 
a fair wind, expected to reach Wenchow in three or 
four days ; but alas ! for our hopes, when we reached 
Chu-san, only one tide from Ning-po river, the war 
junk refused to proceed until other junks had joined 
the fleet ; so there we had to stay for nine days, while 
the fairest of winds was blowing. 

I was anxious to see my new home, and being 
fresh out from England, and unaccustomed to the 
slow ways of the Chinese, my active temperament 
was sorely tried, as day after day we were put off 
with the promise we should leave by the next tide. 
I bore the disappointment as well as I could, until 
the eighth day, when, woman-like, I had a good 
cry, which relieved my pent-up feelings. We 
were fifteen days between Ning-po and Wenchow, 
a distance of only 150 miles. Wenchow itself is 
"beautiful for situation," having fertile mountains 
all round, and as we sailed slowly for days in and 
out amongst the islands, and then up the beau- 
tiful river, with grand mountains on either side, I 



16 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

almost fancied myself in dear old Scotland. Indeed 
the similarity has been remarked by many, except 
that instead of the clear blue lakes of the latter, we 
had the thick muddy water of the river. At that time 
Wenchow was not an open port, and indeed it was 
not until seven years after this date that trading 
steamers were permitted to sail up her waters. 

On reaching there we got a very hearty welcome 
from Mr. Jackson, who had come from Tai-chow to 
take charge of Mr. Stott's work during his absence, 
but left soon after for his own station. Never shall I 
forget the amount of excitement my presence caused ; 
daily crowds of women came to see the first foreign 
lady who had been in their midst, and when I ven- 
tured out, it seemed as if the whole city was gathered 
to see me. At first I only went out in a sedan-chair, 
but the bearers were compelled to stand still while 
they looked at the strange object. Nor did they get 
easily over their curiosity. For a long time I was a 
strange thing to them, as if hardly human. 

My first year in China was full of trial, being the 
ever memorable year of the " Tien-tsin Massacre." It 
was long after the event before we got details of 
that horrible crime. The natives seemed to know 
all about it before we did, and very soon the city 
was placarded with the vilest reports about us. 
They said that at Tien-tsin all the foreigners had 
been killed or driven out of the place, because 



"IN DUE SEASON'' 17 

they kidnapped and murdered children, taking out 
their eyes, heart, and liver to compound into medi- 
cine. The same evil deeds were being done in this 
city. "Was it not known that we pretended to 
keep a school ? " " Was it not true that so many 
children were missing ? " " Had not some seen barrels 
in which were salted down babies ? " " What was 
hard at Tien-tsin, was easy here, for there were but 
two ; drive out the pests and let the city be at rest." 
Such were some of the expressions of the placards. 
For about three months I hardly dared venture out 
of the house, and my husband was often met with 
stones and vile curses. For a few days there was a 
stream of people looking in every conceivable place 
for the said barrels ; one of the school-boys was asked 
where the missing children were, and when he said it 
was all nonsense and lies, they said he had eaten the 
foreign medicine and would not tell. For a time my 
husband felt very anxious ; if he had been alone he 
could have braved it, but the responsibility of another 
life seemed to weigh upon him. 

One day he asked what I thought of a plan to 
leave for a few days in a junk, hoping when we 
returned all would be quiet. I saw it was on my 
account he made this suggestion, and when I 
answered that I feared if we left we might never get 
back again, and that I would rather stay and trust 
the Lord, he felt quite relieved. Through the Lord's 

3 



i8 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

mercy we weathered that and many another storm ; 
indeed, we got so used to threatening placards 
and having the day of our death posted up, which 
passed by as quietly as other days, that we began to 
feel less anxious about their threats. But in the 
midst of this time of suffering we were not without 
encouragement. Mr. Stott wrote in September, 1870, 
to a dear friend : 

" Since I wrote you last, we have met with a few 
cheering circumstances. One came at a time when I 
was feeling cast down a little about the work. Owing 
to the massacre at Tien-tsin, we were in trouble and 
could not get out, and very few were coming in. 
One day a man came from the neighbouring pre- 
fecture, and said he wanted to see me. He told me 
he had been in company with a man who was a 
member here, and had heard him speak stones of 
Jesus Christ and of the God who created the 
heavens and the earth, and sent His Son to die for 
sinners ; that they read the Bible every night to- 
gether, and prayed to God to pardon and redeem 
them, and that he believed the ' doctrine ' of Jesus 
and trusted on His merits for salvation, and that three 
or four others also believed. These I have never seen, 
but the man, who was a pedlar, and was in the city 
a few days refilling his pack, attended our evening 
worship every night, but has now gone again to 
pursue his business ; also two of the boys are taking 



"IN DUE SEASON" 19 

an interest in the truth ; their minds are expanding 
and they most readily understand the Scriptures. 
Thus often the Lord encourages us even in our 
darkest moments, though not always does the fruit, 
which seems so promising at the time, mature." 



CHAPTER III 

' They that make them are like unto them ; so is every one that 
trusteth in them." PSA. cxv. 8. 

ANOTHER letter, dated March, 1871, describing 
idol worship and processions, gives some idea 
how excited the people get at such a time : 

" It is difficult to give information of idol worship, 
although I witnessed it daily, and idol processions 
are legion. 

" Idols in Wenchow are usually made of a cross 
piece of wood to represent the body and arms, other 
pieces being fixed for legs ; then on the wood is 
twisted straw ropes to bring it as much as possible to 
the form required ; on the straw is added clay, laid 
on in coats or layers, each having to dry before the 
next coat is added, the whole process taking some 
months if the idol is a large one ; the outer layer of 
clay is put on with much skill and care, as this must 
give expression to the countenance, &c. When dry, 
the painter smooths the cracks with putty, and 
paints in the orthodox fashion of its class. When all 
is finished there is generally a dedication feast, 



" THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 21 

according to the rank of the idol ; then it is estab- 
lished. The idol is first worshipped at the feast of 
its dedication, and according to the merits it is said 
to possess. The worshipper brings two small candles 
and lights them on the altar with a few sticks of 
incense. After placing them on the altar, he kneels 
on the kneeboard (I have seen very many kneel, go 
through a course of bowing, and then turn round for 
their pipe, light it composedly at the burning candle, 
sit, and enjoy asmoke on the kneeboard) ; a few more 
prostrations, and the affair is over. Processions are 
generally got up in honour of some festival. There 
are shops where all the fixings are kept, and they 
usually contract for so many articles, according to the 
money they are able to raise, and only those streets 
get the procession through which can afford to contri- 
bute well. All the beauties in the neighbourhood wear 
their gala dresses, and come and sit in their doors, or 
at the street crossing, to see and be seen. The proces- 
sion is usually preceded by a band of boys gaudily 
dressed, bearing banners of gay and fantastic shapes, 
then a band of musicians, making the most un- 
musical, hideous sounds. A kind of pipe is con- 
spicuous, but the universal gong is the most pro- 
minent, and pours forth a torrent of sound almost 
deafening. Then comes the idol seated in an 
enormous sedan-chair carried by many bearers, the 
people kneeling and worshipping as it passes. I 



22 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

have seen the bearers streaming with perspiration 
under a vertical sun, and when it was set down 
wiping their tanned faces and falling on their knees 
before the disgusting object that was wasting their 
strength." 

We lived at first in a small three-roomed Chinese 
house, having only the three upper rooms for our- 
selves a bedroom, my husband's study, and the 
centre our living-room. The rooms below were the 
bedrooms of the schoolboys. We had then a fairly 
decent man for a cook, but utterly untaught ; my 
husband had existed on any kind of food they could 
provide, and suffered much from indigestion as the 
result. An amusing incident could be related of his 
experiences during this time ; once being tired of 
rice three times a day, he asked his cook if he could 
not make him some cakes for breakfast. He beamed 
encouragingly, and next morning there were hot 
cakes ; but, oh ! so solid and hard and with a lump 
of fat pork in the centre. Not relishing this, and yet 
not willing to discourage budding genius, he waited 
till all had gone to bed that night, and abstracted 
from the tiny larder all the pork that could be found. 
Next morning the hot cakes came as before. What 
could be in the centre this time ? There was no 
pork in the house ; the very suspiciously white mass 
was found to be nothing more hurtful than a piece of 
turnip. After that cakes were given up. 



"THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 23 

Instead of sitting down quietly and learning the 
language, as I would have liked, I had to put my 
house in order, which was not to be done in a day ; 
the cook had to be taught how to cook, and the 
coolie had to be taught how to wash and iron clothes, 
clean, scrub, &c. Thanks to the early training of a 
careful grandmother, these things were not much of 
a trouble to me, except in the matter of bread- 
making ; time after time I tried to produce bread 
without yeast, following the recipes of cookery books, 
with the result that the bread might have done for 
hearthstones, but not for food. My husband en- 
couraged me by saying it had a good taste, though 
it was a little hard ; but for his patience I would 
probably have given up long before success crowned 
my efforts. 

Some of my experiences in those early days were 
both trying and amusing. I remember one day, 
after having spent the morning teaching the coolie 
how to wash clothes, I had put a boilerful on to 
boil, and telling him not to touch them till I came 
back, I retired for an hour's rest. On returning I 
lifted the lid of the boiler, when to my horror I saw 
dark blue water and my clothes dyed dark ; the 
coolie thought it a good opportunity of putting in 
his blue calico shirt, which was more lively than com- 
fortable Of course my work had to be done all over 
again 



24 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

I found not only the school-children's clothing but 
my husband's claimed my attention. He had been 
put to some queer straits in his efforts to keep his 
stockings mended. Of course no native knew how 
to mend such things, and he had nearly as little 
idea himself. One day, while looking in his box for 
something to fill up a large hole, he spied a dress- 
coat which he had brought from England with him. 
It was useless as it was, so he thought it would do for 
mending ; cutting off one of the tails and spreading 
it on the floor, he put his foot on the top, made a 
chalk mark all round, leaving a good flap to turn 
over. It was a good evening's work, and when I 
ruthlessly cut off the feet of the said stockings he 
boasted they had lasted two years. The coat after- 
wards was given to his teacher, and, though minus 
a tail, kept him warm for several years under his 
Chinese garment. Flannels, too, were in a sad condi- 
tion ; of course they did not know how to wash such 
things. When I asked how they came to be this 
peculiar colour (a greenish yellow), he explained 
that the first time they were washed the coolie had 
put them into a tub, and poured the thick muddy 
water of the river over them, thus leaving them for 
a day or two ; when washed and returned to Mr. 
Stott the hardness suggested a shaking, when the 
clouds of dust almost blinded him. 

With so many other duties it was not to be ex- 



"THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 25 

pected that I could learn the language very fast. 1 
was distressed after nearly two years to find, though 
able to speak enough for household matters, I was 
unable to teach the gospel to the women who almost 
daily visited me. My husband had engaged a 
Christian woman at Ning-po to help me in caring 
for the schoolboys ; she loved to go with her hymn- 
book and New Testament visiting among the women. 
I was too ignorant at the time to know how little her 
Ning-po dialect was understood by our Wenchow 
women ; perhaps it was well I did not know, for it 
comforted me greatly to do her work, while I sent 
her out daily to teach the poorer women around of 
the Saviour's love. 

My health, too, suffered much from the climate ; 
the second year I had a very severe illness, which 
nearly cost me my life. One day, while in a very 
low condition, my husband was called away to save 
a man who had eaten opium ; he was loth to leave 
me, too weak to make my wants known to others, 
but I urged him to go, for I was sorely tried by 
the thought that I was hindering instead of helping 
him, as I so longed to do. He had been gone, 
perhaps, about an hour. It was a hot day in July, 
and I suppose partly from the heat and partly from 
my weakness I fainted ; when I recovered conscious- 
ness my bed was surrounded on all sides by school- 
boys, teachers, and servants who had come to wail 



26 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

thinking I was dead. One had run off for Mr. Stott, 
and meeting him on the way back, cried : " Oh, 
master, come back ; mistress is dead ! " Hoping it 
might be only a faint, he hurried home and found 
me restored to consciousness. I remember so well, 
when able to sit up a little, how I longed for two 
things, either of which I thought would make me 
well the sight of one of my countrywomen, or a 
little beef-tea, neither of which were within my reach. 

In those days we were not well off in the matter of 
food ; we had but little communication with the out- 
side world except by letter. Once in two years we 
took a holiday, when we brought in necessary stores 
to last us the next two years, for in the city of 
Wenchow we could neither get beef or mutton, milk, 
potatoes, or butter. 

But these were by no means our greatest hardships ; 
the indifference of the people affected us more than 
our surroundings. After the second year I had the 
servants trained, so that I could give most of my 
time to missionary work. I began first by visiting 
in their homes, and everywhere I was well received, 
being a curiosity to be looked and wondered at. 
They thought it strange I should speak their 
language, but they had little heart for my message. 
Alas ! they did not know they needed a Saviour. 

About this time my husband and Mr. Jackson, who 
had joined us about the end of my first year, rented 



"THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 27 

a large shop in the busy part of the city for a chapel ; 
they fitted up one part of it as a bookshop, and a 
native preacher sat daily selling books and preaching 
to all who might come in, and in the afternoon the 
large chapel was thrown open, when either my 
husband or Mr. Jackson preached. At first crowds 
came to hear, but after a time they dropped off, 
and the ones and the twos who really wanted to 
be taught came to listen. An extract from Mr. 
Stott's letter describes the kind of crowd he often 
had to deal with : 

" When the gates are opened, in rushes every one 
near street strollers and loungers, rowdies, travelling 
tradesmen of all kinds, hawkers crying out their 
wares, conjurors, fortune-tellers, musicians, thieves 
and beggars ; the shaven pate of a Bhuddist priest, 
the cowl of the Touist priest may also be seen, and 
the noise is almost beyond description. I assure you 
it is no easy task to arrest or keep the attention of 
such a crowd, and it is a great strain upon the lungs 
and intellect, as I have proved yesterday by experi- 
ence. In the forenoon I kept nearly every eye fixed, 
every mouth open, and every tongue quiet for more 
than three-quarters of an hour, while I told them of 
the origin of sin, its effects, and salvation through 
our Redeemer. Many listened attentively all the 
time ; the greater portion flit about, go and come, 
and never sit down. My daily prayer is that our 



28 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

chapel may be the birthplace of many souls. Yester- 
day far more than a thousand people heard ; it takes 
long for them to understand, but by God's blessing 
we are giving ' line upon line ' as they are able to 
receive it." 

About the same time he refers to the conversion 
of the two eldest boys in the school ; they, with two 
other boys, were baptized soon after. A letter written 
by these boys to the same friend, who had shown 
them much kindness, is here inserted, and may be 
interesting as a specimen of Chinese composition : 

"Honoured and respected Sir, We, the under- 
mentioned boys, in the tenth moon and twenty- 
seventh day received a letter from you, which our 
teacher, Mr. Stott, translated for us. You have for 
a long time shown us much kindness, and your kind 
exhortations to us are very good. 

"We Wenchow boys, although the road is very 
long, seem so near as almost to eat with you at the 
same table ; we cannot thank you enough for the 
interest you take in us. 

" In the first place, we want to thank you for the 
beautiful pictures you sent us, although in themselves 
not of infinite value, yet they manifest a loving heart. 
Also you continually pray for us ignorant boys, that 
in school we may increase knowledge and continue 
in good bodily condition ; also that in reading the 




* 
H 



rt - 
ffl 'J3 

il 



^ (1) 

ii c^ 

l-g 



" c 

OJ 

II 



"THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 29 

Bible we may understand and know about God. We 
also do a little at the books of the native sages, and 
are able to understand somewhat, because you pray 
for us, but your very humble servants know but 
little of propriety ; we also forget your grace, and 
have no grace to give you in return ; our faces are 
like brass, and our necks stiff as iron forgive us. 

" By the grace of God in the former part of this 
year a chapel was opened in the Five Horse Street, 
and very many have heard the gospel. At first they 
were very noisy and understood but little, now there 
is a great difference for the better ; they are willing 
to sit quietly and listen. To preach is also far less 
difficult. Also, before we removed, our sleeping 
rooms were much hampered ; but we are better here 
the rooms are large and can accommodate five or 
six easily : no matter how many come, there is room. 

" At worship we every morning and evening read 
the Scriptures and pray to God. At present in the 
mornings we are reading the Book of Jeremiah the 
prophet of God, how the Lord sent him to the King 
of Judah with a message ; but the king would not 
listen to him, but hardened his heart, and disgraced 
the prophet by putting him into a dungeon ; but the 
Lord vindicated His servant, and manifested His 
power by punishing that king and his people. At 
evening worship we are reading the fifth book of 
the New Testament, the Acts of the Apostles ; we 



30 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

are at the ninth chapter, where Saul persecuted the 
disciples of Jesus. He was fierce as a lion, and 
intended to eat up the disciples, by means of a 
letter from the authorities at Jerusalem ; but on the 
way to Damascus he met the Lord, who changed his 
heart, and from that day till the day of his death he 
served the Lord. The mystery of God we are unable 
to understand, but we are sincere in our worship. We 
pray that the grace of God may be abundantly to 
you, and yours, to all generations. 

" P.S. When you see errors in our writing or our 
composition, pass lightly over, and don't laugh at us, 
for we are already ashamed of ourselves. 

" Written at the school-house of Wenchow, tenth 
moon, twenty-seventh day. 

"SENG Si NYU, 
"TSIU DIE CHENG, 

" For all the rest." 

Mr. Stott writes : " There are many things to give 
trouble and anxiety ; it is not all smooth sailing, nor 
yet all success. If we were to sum up our defeats, 
I am sure it would be easy for me to show ten failures 
for one success." In writing of the difficulties of 
sustained teaching, he adds : " When the novelty 
of reading or speaking God's Word wears off*, it 
needs a strong hold within the veil to sustain us ; 
only close living and walking with God can do this, 



" THEY THAT MAKE THEM " 31 

and my experience leads me to the conclusion that 
it can only be got or maintained by living, active 
faith and prayer real prayer, the soul grappling 
like Jacob, getting strength, not weakness, from the 
struggle." 

In November, 1871, we had an interesting case 
of conversion that of a Bhuddist priest. After he 
had believed the truth he left his monastery, returned 
to his native village, and began farm work. He was 
most earnest in telling all whom he met of the God 
who had saved him, and we had hoped for fresh 
openings through his efforts ; but only a few months 
after his baptism, while on his way to join us in a 
communion service, his boat was overturned in a 
storm, and our brother, with twenty-eight others, 
found a watery grave. It is to this man Mr. Stott 
refers in the following : 

" Last night three elderly men from the country 
remained to inquire further about the ' doctrine/ and 
seemed in earnest. Our friend, the Bhuddist priest, 
has come, and begs not to be sent away again with- 
out baptism. He says that in and round his village 
twenty-eight people believe the gospel, and have 
turned from idolatry. That statement must be modi- 
fied, and perhaps really means that about that number 
acquiesce in what he says about worshipping idols, 
and of the only living and true God ; but allowing 
it to be modified, there is still a good margin in his 



32 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

favour. If he has faithfully told twenty-eight persons 
all he knows, that is something. He says he is 
known for ten miles round as the turncoat priest." 

Two years later there was another interesting case 
of a man who had been a priest all his life, and was 
over seventy when he first heard the gospel ; he 
attended more or less regularly for two or three 
years, and then asked to be baptized ; but was told 
he could not be a follower of Christ while wearing 
the priestly garb, and living on the gains of idolatry. 
This was a sore disappointment ; he was an old man, 
unable to work, and had no other means of livelihood. 

This was a case we longed to help, but feared the 
result upon the young church. He continued in the 
temple, but got others to perform his priestly duties ; 
he was troubled at not being baptized, so one day, 
putting on clean garments, he went to a mountain 
stream near by, prayed on the bank, then plunged in 
and baptized himself. A few days afterwards he met 
with one of the Christians, and asked whether he 
thought that baptism would do ; but the Christian 
was unable to give him any information, never having 
heard of such a case before. 

It was not long ere we heard of the fruit of this 
man's labour. Mr. Stott, writing to a friend a few 
months afterwards, says : 

" During the last ten days three new inquirers have 
come ; one, an old man near seventy, has been a 



"THEY THAT MAKE THEM" 33 

vegetarian for nearly forty years, and has been to 
all the temples in the district worshipping. Lately, 
he went to a temple some distance from his home 
to burn candles, &c. ; while worshipping, the priest 
saw him, and after making sure there was no one to 
hear, said, ' Elder brother, I have been a priest for 
sixty years, and worshipped these things until two 
years ago ; but they never did me any good, and 
never will. You, like myself, are an old man, and 
must soon die. Come inside and I will tell you 
who, and how, to worship.' He then took him into 
his room and preached Jesus to him. The question 
naturally arose, ' Where did you hear such things ? ' 
' From the foreigners in the city.' ' From the 
foreigners ! ' he exclaimed ; ' why, there is no crime 
under heaven but the foreigners have committed, 
and they are going to be beheaded one of these 
days, if indeed it be not already done.' The priest 
assured him that was untrue, and told him he 
had been to Wenchow only three days before, and 
had listened to the true words of God. The priest 
informed him that some tens of good men had 
entered the religion, and were going to eternal happi- 
ness in heaven; he, too, would have joined them, 
but he was too old to earn his rice, and had nothing 
to depend on but the temple, and the missionary had 
said he could not be a disciple of Jesus and eat the 
rice of idols. All this and much more the poor old 

4 



34 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

priest told him ; also of pardon and peace through 
Jesus, God's Son. He died in the temple, but, we 
believe, a true disciple." 

About this time a man from Dong-ling dropped 
in to hear the foreigner. He was interested, and had 
a long talk with the native preacher. He had a good 
many questions to ask, and returned home to think. 
He came again and again, and, after a while, truly 
received the truth. He had been told that opium 
growing was nearly as bad as opium smoking. He 
had some growing in his fields, and his conscience 
became troubled. One night he was trying to argue 
with himself: he was poor ; it paid better than any- 
thing else ; it was too late in the season to grow 
wheat ; he would let it alone this year, but give it up 
the following. He could not sleep, however ; the 
question troubled him more than he liked. At last 
he rose by dawn, took his scythe, and cut down 
every root of opium. He was baptized soon after, 
and, when we visited him two years later, we found 
his wife and mother true Christians ; he also con- 
ducted morning and evening prayers, when eleven 
of his neighbours joined him. 

Surely this was an instance of what a sincere heart 
and simple eye to God can do. He had but little 
ability, but what he had he used for God. 



CHAPTER IV 

"They imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able 
to perform." PSA. xxi. n. 

IN April, 1873, Mr. Stott paid his first visit into 
the Dong-ling district, and thus writes : 
" Last week I made a journey into the country, to 
a place distant about twenty miles from here. Two 
days before I went to a village about six miles off, 
and when I returned I found my pony's back sadly 
hurt by the saddle. There was nothing for it but to 
rest him for two days and re-stuff my saddle, which 
was a difficult job for me. At the time appointed, 
accompanied by one of the members, and a man to 
carry my bed, I got off pretty early. It was a lovely 
spring morning, and the road we had to travel was 
beautiful in the extreme. I heard the frogs croaking 
for the first time this season ; the oil plant was in full 
bloom, filling the air with fragrance ; farmers were 
sowing the early rice, and the bamboo groves were 
full of the melody of singing birds ; the snakes also 
were out sunning themselves, and wriggling their 

35 



36 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

ugly forms on the sides of the path. After riding 
about five miles or so, we struck the foot of the hills, 
and after dinner we came to the district we had in 
view, and I rode from hamlet to hamlet, preaching 
and selling books. The whole district soon turned 
out to see and hear, for there had never been a 
foreigner in that place before. We could see men in 
the fields a mile off throw down their hoes and run 
as if for life, and all to see your humble servant. As 
we advanced the crowds gathered more thick and 
noisy. One cannot judge of the noise of a Chinese 
crowd till they have heard one ; nobody listens, but 
everybody shouts at the top of his voice, and such 
shrill, piercing sounds, no Saxon throat could pro- 
duce anything like them. 

" I continued preaching until nearly sundown, then 
went to the house where we were to pass the night ; 
but the scene there would need a livelier pen than 
mine to give even an outline of it. At last, almost in 
despair, I took my crutch and gave a knock on the 
wooden partition, and ordered every tongue to be still 
and listen to me. To my surprise I succeeded in getting 
them quieted pretty well, and then preached salvation 
through Jesus Christ till my throat was sore. Then 
the man who carried my bed took up the subject 
and showed them that idols made of wood and clay 
could not do any one good, and exhorted them all to 
worship the only living and true God, who had sent 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 37 

Jesus Christ, His dear Son, to open the way of 
heaven for them, and who is now there interceding 
for those who trust Him. Most of the people leu to 
get their evening rice, but soon returned in greater 
force than ever ; and, though tired and weary, I had 
to begin again and preach to a late hour. Then I 
asked all to leave and return in the morning, but just 
as I was going to bed a deputation from the elders of 
the village came, saying that all the wisest of the old 
men were in a house near by and wanted a quiet 
interview, to hear and see for themselves, for the 
youngsters had brought strange news. This was a 
rare good chance of speaking for our blessed Saviour, 
and lifting up my heart to Him for guidance, He 
gave it, and enabled me to speak of His Holy Name. 
" I continued for nearly an hour to address four- 
teen men, who listened most attentively all the time. 
One asked 'how to worship this true God.' I told 
him, and knelt on the wet mud floor and prayed for 
them all, thanked God for His goodness in giving 
them life and food, and asked Him to send the Holy 
Spirit to teach them and open their hearts. When I 
got up they all were surprised ; some looking at me 
with amazement, not knowing what to make of it. 
One asked, ' But will God hear you ? ' I answered, 
'Your own books tell you that heaven has eyes, 
which is true ; would it not be strange if heaven had 
eyes and no ears ? ' They all replied, ' True, true.' 



38 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

"At a very late hour they left, and I could not 
help thanking God for such a golden opportunity of 
setting His Name before so many people." 

These preaching tours were continued as often as 
possible. Sometimes I would accompany him to the 
nearer places, but more often I had to remain to look 
after home affairs. 

Referring to another of these tours, Mr. Stott 
writes : 

" Some three weeks ago I had an interesting 
preaching tour. We visited a good many towns and 
villages, and had often over a thousand listeners ; 
sometimes we preached from the theatre stand, or in 
the village temple, or again, when no good situation 
was obtainable, from my horse's back. I had two 
Christian natives with me, who also preached in turn. 
One, however, lost his voice after the second day, 
but the other continued to speak. He could be 
heard a quarter of a mile off. I have seldom listened 
to a voice equal to his ; perhaps the late lamented 
Duncan Matheson's was as good, but Duncan's was a 
deep bass, and the native I refer to was a shrill tenor, 
and anything but pleasing. However, he preached 
Jesus Christ plainly and fully. These stayed about 
ten days after I left, and preached in a few other 
places. 

" I did not feel comfortable in staying away too 
long, with Mrs. Stott all alone, and so many people 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 39 

to look after; but she can get along much better 
now, can speak pretty well, and is making good 
progress in the Chinese character. She goes out 
to visit twice a week, and has a daily class of the 
smaller boys, and an advanced Bible-class on Sunday 
afternoons. Besides, she takes the entire charge of 
the food and clothing of the school ; that, with the 
addition of our own affairs and her Chinese studies, 
keeps her busy, so that she seldom has an hour to 
spare ; but I am thankful to say she is in good health. 
" I wish I had time to refer in greater detail to the 
many places visited at this time. One, in particular, 
struck me as being the most lovely I have ever seen ; 
but the people seemed sadly degraded. The village 
was situated in a glen of almost horse-shoe shape ; at 
the back and sides the hills rose high and abrupt, 
assuming almost the aspect of mountains, while on 
in front was a long plain, widening as it went. A 
beautiful stream ran past the village, which we 
crossed ; the gardens seemed full of fruit, oranges, 
pomeloes, and pomegranates, all ripening on the 
trees. The head family of the village took us in for 
the night and treated us well. After supper the 
people came crowding in, and I preached to them to 
a late hour, while the natives who were with me had 
a still larger audience in the reception hall. They 
treated me thus kindly because 1 had formerly cured 
one of the ladies when ill with fever. 



4 o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" Next morning I was up, had breakfast, and in the 
saddle again at sunrise, and made our way to another 
village, when the whole population turned out to the 
temple yard. I climbed on to the theatre stand and 
preached in turn with the native assistant. By and 
by the head priest raised some objection to our 
preaching in front of the gods. I said if the people 
objected I would go somewhere else ; but most cried, 
' No, no, stop where you are.' One of the crowd 
called out, ' If the priest is not quiet, we will carry 
him to the top of the hill and make him fast to a 
tree.' That remark caused a good deal of merriment 
at the expense of the poor priest, who remained quiet 
for the rest of the time. As I wanted to push on 
I did not accept the kind hospitality of the village 
schoolmaster, who wished to detain me to dinner." 

After this quite a number in Dong-ling became 
interested, and my husband was invited to go and 
preach to them. He did so, with the result that a 
little church was formed in the house of one of the 
members. 

One day Mr. Stott had gone to Dong-ling in the 
hope of finding a house he could rent as a chapel. 
On the day I expected him home a man came from 
there bringing me a large fish as a present, and 
saying Mr. Stott had found a place for a chapel, and 
had sent him for money to settle the matter. The 
present of the fish was a little suspicious. I asked 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 41 

whether he had not a letter for me, and he said he 
had, but on stepping out of the boat it had dropped 
into the canal and was lost. A few more questions 
revealed the rogue, and as I spoke of sending for 
Yamen runners, he ran off, leaving the fish behind 
him. A little later my husband returned, and as we 
discussed the fish at tea we laughed over the clumsy 
attempt at fraud. 

I think it was in 1873 or 1874 we were surprised 
one morning by a strange man coming in with a 
small bundle of bedding on his back. Almost his 
first words were, " I have come to stay and be taught 
the doctrine." We did not receive people in that 
easy fashion, but when my husband sat down to talk 
with him he heard a strange story. The man had 
been a soldier during the Taiping rebellion. He left 
father, mother, and a young wife to serve his country, 
and was absent two or three years. During his 
absence his wife had died, though his father and 
mother were still alive. He had become disgusted 
with what he had seen of the world, and had deter- 
mined to give himself up to a religious life. What 
money he had he spent in purchasing coffins for his 
father and mother, and making their graves. Having 
fulfilled this filial duty he retired to the hills to lead a 
holy life. He built himself a very small hut, with 
bed and bedding too short to lie down in, compelling 
himself to rest in a sitting posture. He soon got a 



42 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

name for sanctity, and the people of the neighbouring 
villages brought him presents of food in return for 
his prayers. One day a man was passing the house 
of a Christian, and on being asked by him where he 
was going, replied, "To the hermit with a present." 
" Oh," said the Christian ; " wait a moment, I, too, 
have a present for him." He brought out a Gospel, 
and asking the young man to give it to the holy man 
on the hill, went on with his work, probably thinking 
no more of the matter. Some days after this the 
hermit saw the young man again, and asked where 
that book came from. He answered, " I suppose 
from the foreigner in Wenchow, but I know little 
about it. My neighbour talks about a true God, and 
one Jesus Christ ; but I don't understand." The 
poor hermit became restless to know something more 
about this strange doctrine, and for the first time in 
three years he came down the hill and walked to 
Wenchow to inquire after the true God. After hearing 
his story, my husband invited him to stay with us 
for a week, and seeing his diligent study of the Bible 
and eagerness to learn, asked him to stay on a few 
weeks longer. 

One morning, while I was having a Bible-class 
with the schoolboys and others who had joined, the 
subject being John iii., I saw this man weeping. 
My husband took him aside and asked him what was 
the matter. He only answered, " My sins, my sins ! " 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 43 

It was the first time we had seen a Chinaman weep 
because of sin, and it thrilled us through and through. 
He never returned to the hill again, but in his home 
he found too much opposition to contend with, and, 
strange to say, though we sent time after time, and 
prayed much for him, he never entered into the truth. 
After a year or so he led us to understand he did not 
care for us to send to him any more, as his parents 
did not want him to become a Christian. 

But the young man who had carried the book to 
him, and of whom we had never thought, began to 
wonder what was in that book, to cause the man to 
come down from the hill and break his vow of 
sanctity. He inquired further into the truth, and, 
after a time, was converted, and through him his 
father, mother, and aunt became Christians, and are 
still in the church. 

We had often trials and disappointments through 
the duplicity and love of gain, which is so common 
in the Chinese character; a man would profess a 
most earnest desire for the truth, and seem to hold 
it very precious, while all the time his hope was that 
he would get employment of some kind. A case in 
point was a school teacher, who seemed to be con- 
verted, and almost daily would, of his own accord, 
stop the boys in their studies to read the Bible and 
pray with them. He had been an opium smoker, 
but professed to have given it up when he became a 



44 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Christian ; but later on he went back to his opium 
and gave up all profession of faith in Christ. He 
had two boys in school, who, after the usual term of 
education, were apprenticed to trades ; for a long 
while we lost sight of them, but a few years ago the 
eldest of them was truly converted, and is now one 
of our volunteer unpaid preachers. 

There was another who deceived us for years ; he 
had been a fortune-teller, but when he professed to 
receive the gospel he gave up everything of the kind, 
and seemed to be very earnest in telling his friends 
and neighbours the good news. This brought some 
persecution upon him, which he bore bravely. At 
last they trumped up a case against him ; he was 
taken to the Yamen and accused of crimes he had 
never committed. The mandarin told him plainly 
that if he would renounce this foreign religion he 
might be set free ; but he answered, " You may cut 
my head off, but I will never renounce the Christian 
religion." He was kept in prison for nearly three 
months, and we were powerless to help him. 

We were much touched by his steadfastness, and 
began to think that after all we must be wrong in 
our want of confidence in him, for somehow we never 
could quite trust him. He farmed his own land, but 
spent much of his time in volunteer preaching, so 
that through his efforts the work began to grow 
much in the Dong-ling district. The question of 



" A MISCHIE VO US DE VICE " 45 

employing him often came up in our minds, for we 
were sorely in need of teachers in those early days, 
but this feeling we had, of not being quite sure of our 
man, kept my husband from doing so. He grew 
tired of waiting, and, after a little agitation, boldly 
went over to the Roman Catholics, saying that he 
had waited for seven years in the hope of employ- 
ment, and that if we would not pay him he would 
have nothing to do with us. The Roman Catholics 
employed him, and the true character came out in 
his determined efforts to upset our work ; he had 
brought many of these men into the church, and 
meant to take them out if he could, but happily he 
had been the means of bringing in better men than 
himself, and only a very few halting ones followed 
him ; but he was a thorn in our flesh for many years. 
About the year 1874 we passed through a series 
of difficulties through evil reports ; if there was evil 
in the city the foreigner must be at the bottom of 
it. A secret society, called the " ring " society, had 
sprung up ; Mr. Stott was said to be the head and 
moving spirit ; all who chose to join would receive a 
gold ring and four dollars, but they would be pledged 
to do all in their power to upset the present govern- 
ment. Mr. Stott was pestered for gold rings and 
dollars, and one day, making sure that an applicant 
knew what he was doing, and was ready for any 
villainy, he felt the time had come to put a stop to 



46 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

it. Sending his card to the Yamen, he asked them 
to take charge of the man and to inquire into the 
case. Two Yamen runners were at once sent, and 
before they had taken him outside the gate they had 
possessed themselves of his best garments and hat. 
After a few days my husband requested the man 
might be set at liberty, and we were no more troubled 
with the " ring " society. 

An uneasy feeling was all over the city at this 
time. A band had been organised amongst the hills 
for a raid upon the city. They were known to be 
strong, and of course the foreigner was said to be 
at the head. It had been working for months. The 
authorities took alarm, and sent to Tai-chow for 
troops. Cannons were placed upon the city walls, 
the gates closed each night at sunset, and a mandarin 
placed upon guard until daybreak. We knew our 
name was connected with this uprising, but we had 
passed through so many storms of the kind that my 
husband and Mr. Jackson left me, as usual, to visit 
the out-stations, and expected to be away nearly a 
fortnight. They had only been gone a few days, 
when the school teacher came to me in great alarm, 
and said the city was posted with violent placards. 
Mr. Stott, they said, had gone to train and organise 
the band, while I was taking in large quantities of 
rice in order to feed them when they came. The 
teacher said there was great danger of an attack upon 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 47 

us, and urged me to write to the mandarin and 
request protection. I thought and prayed over the 
matter, and finally decided to wait patiently the 
return of my husband. In answer to prayer they 
came home four or five days earlier than expected. 
Mr. Stott at once wrote the authorities denying these 
statements, stating we were quiet and peaceable 
people, bent only on preaching peace to all men, and 
that we had nothing to do with any kind of society, 
and asking for a proclamation to this effect. This 
the mandarin granted, but his proclamations were 
no sooner up than they were torn down, or bespattered 
with mud. The people seemed bent on mischief, 
and we were warned by friendly neighbours we had 
better leave. But how could we leave the few sheep 
we had gathered in from the wilderness ? They did 
not know the heart of the Shepherd. 

At last things got so threatening that our servants 
were warned to leave us ; an attack, they said, had 
been decided upon for the following Tuesday, and if 
they did not go they would probably share our fate. 
So on the Saturday our two servants, and the woman 
who looked after the boys, said they must leave us 
that day. My husband called me downstairs to tell 
me the sorrowful news. It was evident the servants 
were frightened, and I thought we should be better 
without timid people about us. Our coolie had 
recently professed conversion, and it was a bitter 



48 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

disappointment that he should leave us in our hour 
of need. We had expected the hatred of the heathen, 
but not the desertion of the Christian. Without 
expressing any regret we offered him his wages 
with the others, but he refused to take them, saying 
he would be back in a week. "Yes, after we are 
killed, or the danger over," were the words that arose 
in my heart. But I was soon to be ashamed of such 
unkind thoughts, for in about an hour he returned and 
begged to be allowed to stay. The others returned 
a week later, when they saw we were still alive. 

This coolie had rather a hasty temper, which 
sometimes brought him into trouble. One evening, 
while we were at prayer, we could hardly hear our 
own voices for the noise of quarrelling downstairs. 
Mr. Stott went to see what was the matter, and 
found the coolie and one of the elder boys had 
quarrelled. He spoke seriously to them, remarking 
that it was very sad, after all the teaching, that we 
should be disturbed while in prayer by their ^quarrels. 
The coolie hastily produced the horsewhip ; putting 
it in front of Mr. Stott, and himself in position for 
whipping, he remarked, " I am the one most to blame, 
whip me." He was told he must go to God to seek 
and find forgiveness ; and this, I have no doubt, he 
did, but he seemed disappointed that he was not 
whipped also. 

Of course I had all the housework to do in the 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 49 

meantime. We were not, however, without real 
anxiety, for there was no doubt that an attack upon 
the city was intended, and we knew if the robbers 
came we should suffer both at their hands and at 
the hands of the enraged people, who looked upon 
us as the cause of all their suffering. So we made 
a few private plans. A long rope was secured and 
kept in a convenient place ; this was to let us over 
the city wall, where we could fly towards the sea. 
But we hardly knew what to do with a few of our 
school boys who had no homes. A friendly neighbour 
promised that he would give us the first alarm, so 
that we might have time to escape. One midnight 
a terrific knocking at the gate aroused us from our 
first sleep. In a moment we were on the verandah 
listening breathlessly to know what it could be. The 
man who had promised to tell us of the first danger 
rushed in crying, " Mr. Stott, get away as soon as 
you can ; the insurgents have broken in the west gate, 
trampled upon the mandarin, and are now making 
their way through the city." My husband went 
down to gather our people together, to see who 
would go with us to share our uncertain fate, but 
first he despatched a messenger to find out if the 
news were really true. Downstairs they were having 
prayer, commending us all to God, while I was 
upstairs preparing for flight. It was warm weather, 
so I only had to roll a flannel coat for my husband 

5 



50 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

and a thin gown for myself, which made a very small 
parcel, tying twenty dollars round my waist, and 
putting the rest into a bag tied to the neck of a 
bottle in which were secured the title-deeds of the 
house, intending to sink them into the well. These 
few preparations being completed I went downstairs, 
rope in one hand and small bundle in the other. 
Even to this sad picture there was a ludicrous side, 
for we were gravely asked by one of the elder boys 
" what were we going to do with the furniture ? " 
The messenger returned saying the news was true, 
and we had better get off as soon as possible ; but 
I knew from the short time I had been upstairs it 
was impossible for him to have been to the west gate 
and back : I suggested to Mr. Stott to ask him, and 
he acknowledged that he had not, but all the city 
was talking about it. He was again despatched, 
with orders to run all the way, and, if true, to run 
back with all haste, and we might still have time to 
escape. Oh, what a long, long time it seemed ; every 
moment was precious, and might mean life to us. 
At last he returned, only to say it was a false alarm ; 
a band of thieves had spread the report, and when 
the poor people, panic-stricken, ran from their houses, 
they went in and helped themselves. We thanked 
God, went to bed, and slept soundly till morning. 

During those early years it seemed impossible to 
live without offence before the people. For instance, 



"A MISCHIEVOUS DEVICE" 51 

my husband built a chimney, and though not very 
high, immediately it was conjectured to be a signalling 
apparatus to communicate with steamers ; a neigh- 
bour's child took ill and died, and the unfortunate 
chimney was found to be the cause. A deputation 
waited upon us to request that the chimney should be 
pulled down ; this was done, but soon afterwards 
some one else in the neighbourhood took ill, and the 
cause this time was found to be my husband's stable 
that, too, must come down. My husband explained 
that he could not afford the expense, but as it was 
for their own benefit they were at liberty to pull down 
the obnoxious thing and rebuild any shape they 
approved at their own expense. This settled the 
question, and the poor horse's stable was left un- 
touched. Another time, while Mr. Stott was preach- 
ing in the chapel to a large and seemingly attentive 
audience, he happened to look at his watch, when a 
man asked, "What is that he is looking at ? " The reply 
was, " A kind of hocus-pocus instrument whereby he 
can tell how many are to be hocussed by his preach- 
ing, and when they are hocussed to the desired 
number and extent he will stop." Mr. Stott knew 
nothing of this till some time afterwards when, going 
into the country, he found the whole place full of the 
absurd story. 



CHAPTER V 

" Our Lord is above all gods." PSA. cxxxv. 5. 

IT was about this time my husband sent a preacher 
to open up work in the city of Bing-yie. As 
usual, crowds came to listen at first, but soon dropped 
off, and he, feeling rather lonely, asked that some one 
might be sent to help him. We had no one to send, 
so my husband sent a Christian schoolboy, named 
Z-niie, thirteen years of age, for a few months to keep 
him company. One day the lad entered into a 
heathen temple ; he could not see worshippers, 
but at every shrine there were lighted candles and 
incense, showing some one had been there. Turning 
round, he saw an old man just finishing his obeisance 
to the last of the numerous gods, and as he sat down 
to rest the lad addressed him. " Venerable grand- 
father," said he, "why do you worship these idols? 
They are made of clay, and can neither see, hear, 
or help you. Indeed they cannot help themselves, 

for see, some of their fingers are broken off, and 

52 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 53 

others have had the hair of their moustachios stolen 
by rats. Rats do not steal the hair of your moustache : 
why ? Because you are a living man. How foolish, 
then, to worship these things which even the rats may 
rob with impunity. Not only so ; do not the rats 
make their nests inside these very idols ? " The old 
man sighed, and said, " What am I to do ? " The 
lad then told him of the God in heaven, and of Jesus 
Christ His Son, and the way of salvation that had 
been provided for " whosoever will." 

The old man listened with great astonishment, he 
had never heard such wisdom. As he was deeply 
interested, he was invited to the chapel to hear more 
from the preacher. He not only came himself, but 
brought his old wife ; and after a time they both 
became truly converted, and for years led godly, 
consistent lives. The aged couple are now in 
glory. 

This young lad, who was converted when he was 
about twelve, afterwards became an earnest and suc- 
cessful preacher in this very city of Bing-yie. I 
remember Mr. Stott, in speaking, before sending him 
out on his first mission, told him he was to preach 
Christ, and to leave idolatry and their idols and idol 
customs alone ; for as soon as truth entered into their 
heart the other would soon go out. After talking for 
some time he asked the boy if he understood what he 
meant. He said," Yes ; you mean like this : the people 



54 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

are now living in an old tumbled-down hut, and you 
don't want me to pull this down about their ears. 
I am, as it were, to build a beautiful house, furnished 
with all good things, and then invite them to leave 
their old broken-down hut and enter into their new 
possession." That young man laboured earnestly, 
preaching often in the open air ; by and by consump- 
tion manifested itself, and in spite of all our efforts, 
so precious, and as it seemed to us so necessary, a 
life in the early stage of our work, ended. He died, 
twenty-five years of age. That was a great loss to 
the young church, for he had been well taught and 
trained by Mr. Stott. 

In 1872, our cook, who was baptized the day after 
our marriage, married a heathen girl. We were 
grieved, yet what could we do ? To insist that the 
Christians should marry " only in the Lord M was practi- 
cally to forbid marriage, seeing there were no Christian 
women within seven days' journey of them. The 
influence of the heathen wife was soon apparent, first 
in coldness of heart, then in utter indifference to 
spiritual things, and before two years were over we 
had to dismiss him from the church. This led us to 
see something must be done to supply the great need 
of Christian wives for our Christian young men, if we 
would have a strong and healthy church. So after much 
prayer and thought on the subject we decided to 
commence a girls' boarding-school. There were many 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 55 

difficulties in the way ; we had no suitable accommo- 
dation for girls ; then we determined we would have 
no bound feet, and that we knew would probably pre- 
vent our getting the kind of girls we wanted. Some 
other schools had felt it necessary to continue this 
evil practice, because of this very difficulty ; and 
one school that I knew oi had found it very hard to 
contend against this almost universal - custom. But 
we felt the importance of being pioneers, and were 
anxious to begin on a solid basis, that others could 
build upon. It was better we should fight these 
questions at first, rather than start on easier lines and 
have the battle to face later on. We therefore gave 
out that we were prepared to take in a few girls under 
ten years of age, that we should feed, clothe and 
educate them free of expense to their parents, but 
we should require that their feet be unbound, and 
that we should have the right to betroth them to those 
whom we thought fit persons, and that the parents 
should have no power to betroth them without our 
consent. 

At this time we only had one old woman in the 
church, and she was the first to bring me her grand- 
daughter. I explained clearly that her feet would 
be unbound. To this and the other rules she cheer- 
fully consented. The child was a dear little thing, 
nine years of age, and being the only one, I had her 
with me a good deal and of course became very fond 



56 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

of her. When the parents saw this, they thought the 
time had come to make a fuss about her feet. They 
seemed to think I should be sure to give way rather 
than lose the pretty little thing that was so winning ; 
so one day a message was brought to me that the 
child's mother had been crying night and day, for 
some time ; that she was then tearing her hair, be- 
moaning the fate of her child who should grow up 
with feet like a man ; she would never get a husband, 
for who would care for a girl with large feet ? She 
therefore requested me to send her home, as she 
would rather beg from door to door than see her 
daughter so disgraced. I told the messenger they had 
brought her of their own free will ; they understood 
our terms, and had agreed to them ; that if they 
wanted her back they must come and fetch her : but 
first they must pay me the expenses of food and 
clothing, the amount which I had expended upon her. 
Of course they were unable to do this, and as I was 
firm they unwillingly gave in, and so our first battle 
against foot-binding was fought and won. 

Still there was a great difficulty in getting girls, 
owing to this question, and for several years we had 
to be content with four, two of whom we certainly 
would not have received later on when our position 
was established and the benefits of the school mani- 
fested. 

The girls' school has now been in existence twenty- 




c/) 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 57 

two years, and has proved a great blessing to the 
church. The girls have had a thoroughly practical 
training, and most of them become Christian workers 
after they leave school. During the last ten years, 
twenty-two girls have been married, three only of 
whom have left school unconverted. There are seven 
or eight of our married girls who take regular classes 
among women and children. For nearly ten years 
we saw but little spiritual fruit, two or three professed 
to believe on Jesus, but there was no corresponding 
power or change in their lives. Our Bible-readings 
seemed the most wearisome part of the day to them, 
and they appeared to have no spiritual perception. 
For the first few years, while the children were young, 
I did not feel the burden, perhaps, as heavily as I ought 
to have done ; but as years passed on I became 
almost desperate. Many a time I have gone from the 
school to my room with literal tears, sobbing, " Will 
these girls never be saved ? " But in 1 884 the Lord 
was pleased to visit us with a very gracious revival. 

There was no indication of the coming blessing, 
save that the elder girls were more attentive than 
usual with the Bible lessons. One morning in June 
we were sitting as usual at our work, the elder girls 
a little apart with their needlework, while I was sur- 
rounded by a group of little ones whom I was teaching 
to sew and knit. The quiet was suddenly disturbed 
by the eldest girl saying : " Teacher, do you think if I 



58 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

came to Christ now, He would save me?" I looked 
at the girl, there was an expression of earnestness on 
her face I never had seen before. She continued, 
" You have often urged me to come to Christ, but I 
have never been willing ; will He take me now ? " I 
could hardly speak for the joy that welled up in my 
heart. I answered, " Oh, yes," and began to tell her 
of my own conversion when I was two years younger 
than she. While I spoke, she burst into tears, and 
with a cry and sob ran from the room. I could 
contain myself no longer, but with tears of joy I ran 
into my husband's study, and cried : " Blessing is 
coming at last ; Ah-mai is seeking the Lord." We knelt 
together to pour out our thanksgiving, after which I 
returned to the girls. I found Ah-mai in her room. 
We knelt together by her bed while I asked God to 
have mercy upon her soul, to save her then and there ; 
and thinking it best to leave her alone for a time, I 
returned to the schoolroom. Two other girls were 
sobbing, and when I asked what was the matter they 
answered, " We are such sinners." I called them up- 
stairs, that I might quietly point them to the Saviour, 
but their distress was so great they could hardly 
listen. 

One sobbed, "You don't know how bad I have 
been," and going to her cupboard she took out pieces 
of calico and little odds and ends I had given them 
to mend their clothes with, also one hundred cash 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 59 

(about fourpence) ; she put these into my hand and 
said : " Take them away ; they are not mine, I stole 
them." She explained that she had purloined little 
bits of material, &c., and with them had made little 
stomachers, and the hundred cash was the money she 
had received for them. The whole thing was of very 
little value, yet I did not wish her to think lightly of 
sin. I reminded her that Christ had saved a thief 
once. 

The other girl said : " I have been worse than 
that. Do you remember, years ago, losing your silver 
brooch ? Search was made, and it was found under 
Ah-yung's pillow ; everybody thought she had taken 
it, but I stole it, and fearing to be found out, I put it 
there." I did feel indignant, and asked how she 
could stand by and see me punish an innocent child. 
I was so grieved I scarce knew what to say, but felt 
the first thing was to put this right with the one who 
had suffered. Assembling the whole school, and 
calling the little one to me, I asked if she remembered 
my having punished her a few years before for steal- 
ing a brooch ? The child did not remember anything 
about it. I tried to refresh her memory, but it was no 
use, she had completely forgotten the circumstance. 
I told her how grieved I was I had accused her, but 
had done so ignorantly ; it was nevertheless a wrong, 
and in presence of the school I asked her to forgive 
me. 



60 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Quite a number of little eyes twinkled that morn- 
ing ; it was the first time their teacher had to confess 
to them her wrong-doing, and they rather enjoyed 
it. I then told the guilty girl that I had made all 
the reparation I could, and it was for her to find 
out in what way she could repair her fault. I was 
pleased afterwards to hear that she had given the 
little girl the whole of her month's money in compen- 
sation, but that the child generously returned half. 

In a few days those three were clearly and dis- 
tinctly converted, and in three weeks afterwards 
three more. One girl had already left the school to 
be married, and was still unsaved. As soon as the 
others were converted themselves they began in 
earnest to pray for this one ; I was delighted when 
they asked me to join them in prayer. The follow- 
ing Sunday one of the newly converted girls took the 
opportunity to speak to her, and told her how we 
were praying she might be saved. She answered 
carelessly, " It is no use, my heart is cold and hard ; I 
do not seem even to care to be saved." The follow- 
ing Saturday they asked if, in company with another 
Christian, they might visit her ; and on their return 
they almost rushed into my study, calling out breath- 
lessly, " Sy-mo, our eldest sister is saved." My hus- 
band just coming in, and hearing only the last word, 
called, " Wait, I want to hear too." They then told us 
that the Sunday before, after the services, she had 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 61 

gone home in such heaviness of heart, and asked the 
Lord why she, the eldest of the number, should be so 
hard of heart? She said, while she prayed, light 
broke upon her, and she believed her sins were 
washed away. She was baptized some months after- 
wards, but I am sorry to say she has not turned out 
a satisfactory Christian. Her husband, though a 
believer, is somewhat trying in temper, and want of 
harmony at home has led to coldness on the part of 
both. 

Since then there have been periodical revivals, at 
which time three, four, or five have been converted ; 
and only three have left the school unsaved for these 
we still pray. 

During the second gracious revival amongst the 
girls, which took place in about two or three years 
after the first, when four more were converted, our 
coolie's wife was also saved. He had come to us 
almost destitute, but with diligent work and careful- 
ness he saved enough to get a wife, and as he had no 
home for her, he asked if she might live in his room 
for a few months, to which I consented. She was a 
young girl, only fifteen, quiet and diligent, and the 
six months turned into many years, for they are still 
here with their five children, the three eldest in our 
schools. For about three years this young woman 
seemed very indifferent to the gospel ; she attended 
the services because she lived inside, and all vejre. 



62 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

expected to do so ; but at this time she became 
deeply concerned about sin, and one day, while in the 
act of washing clothes, it seemed as though a horror 
of darkness came over her. She left her work, went to 
Mrs. Liii, and begged her to pray that God would 
forgive her sins. For two or three days she con- 
tinued in an anxious state of soul, and then, yielding 
herself to Christ, she rejoiced in the knowledge of 
salvation. 

In 1873 Mr. Jackson was married in Ning-po, and 
in due time brought his young wife to Wenchow. 
We had by that time got possession of the three 
lower rooms as well as the three upper, and for some 
months they lived with us. Mrs. Jackson's ill-health, 
however, called them away to Tai-chow, and later on 
to Ning-po, and when they returned, nearly a year 
after, they were able to rent a house in another part 
of the city. It was a great comfort to have another 
lady here, and we had no small fellowship one with 
another. They had to leave again and again for ill- 
health, but when it became necessary for us to take 
a furlough they willingly took the responsibility of 
the boys' and girls' school, and the little church 
which had been formed. Mrs. Jackson died in Sep- 
tember, 1878, leaving a little girl only nine days old. 
The boys' school had given a good deal of en- 
couragement, not so much in the numbers converted 
,as the character of the converts ; and at this time 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 63 

Die-chang and two others were preachers. Mr. Stott, 
writing a little earlier, says, " Si-niie is now nineteen 
years of age, and is at present acting teacher, as I 
have lent the school-teacher to Mr. Jackson to assist 
him in his difficulties in Chu-chow. Si-niie is a smart 
lad, a good scholar, and understands the Scriptures 
well, but I hardly expect him to equal Tsiu-die-chang 
(who is now in charge of the station at Bing-yie 
as a preacher) ; he speaks at times with almost burn- 
ing earnestness, enough to persuade any one of the 
truth. Si-niie is bashful and proud, and needs very 
careful treatment, but there is a good deal of capital 
material in him. I have heard him several times in 
hot discussions with literary men ; he can patter off 
the native classics glibly, and turn many passages 
against their silly notions with biting power. A 
younger boy, Z-nue, is nearly sixteen years of age, 
has been a member of the church about three years, 
and has all through behaved in a Christ-like manner. 
He is highly esteemed by the members for his con- 
sistent life ; he is very quiet, but ever ready, and 
seldom fails to establish himself in the good graces 
of the people he speaks to. I expect him to be a 
successful evangelist ; often when school is over, 
instead of going to amuse himself with the others, he 
has gone out with a bundle of books and tracts to 
the crowded thoroughfares to sell. Would that they 
were more deeply taught by the Spirit of God, and 



64 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

lived nearer to the fountain of all heat and light and 
love." 

A letter from Si-nlie written to a friend mentioned 
before may prove interesting. Translated by Mr. 
Stott. 

" In the year of grace 1874, first moon : Because 
I have formerly heard that for a long time you 
have been writing letters to Wenchow to inquire 
about the welfare of the boys ; but we have hardly 
courage to receive your messages, for we are un- 
worthy of them, but your kindness and love abound, 
it is beyond our understanding. Not only this, but 
many beautiful pictures you have sent for us. All 
who have seen them admire them ; your kindness [lit. 
grace] is deep as the sea and heavy as the hills. The 
boys would like to go to your place and thank you 
personally before your face, but the way is long, seas 
and hills and impassable barriers intervene, therefore 
we are unable to come. Also we are so unworthy, 
that it would be presumption in us to appear before 
you. 

" To speak of the pictures, some of them are hung 
in the schoolroom, some in the dining-hall, and some 
new ones are in the hands of a paper-hanger being 
done. Also there is hanging up a map of the world. 

" At present there are in the school sixteen boys, 
and we read various books, including the native 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 65 

classics ; but the Scriptures are the text-book for 
morning and evening worship. We are born with 
stupid minds, and our bodies are very lazy, therefore 
we do not know much ; in our daily habits we are 
not diligent, we ought to hang down our heads and 
feel ashamed. 

" To speak of the church, there have not been many 
added for a long time, but there are a few inquiring. 
At present, although there is little fruit, if the Holy 
Spirit were only in the heart of every one who believes, 
the time might soon come when we should see a 
great increase, thirty, sixty, or a hundredfold. 

"I have used this small piece of paper to thank you, 
and pay our respects to yourself, your brothers, and 
all your father's house. Many things I have not made 
plain to you, for my composition is despicable ; I only 
ask you not to despise it. At present let this suffice, 
I will write you longer at another time. May the glory 
of the Triune God be upon you, world without end. 

" P.S. This is the new year, so I will add a word 
more. We have heard that you have a Sunday 
school ; how many scholars have you ? We know 
that if you teach them anything it will be the Word 
of God, which is incomparably the best. I ask if you 
would, instead of me, salute all your scholars and 
convey to them a message. ' You have been born in 
a country where there are no idols ; you have not 
been defiled by them like us, their defilement has 

6 



66 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

gone into us like dye into the fabric.' Although you 
are free of that sin, do not forget that you are the 
seed of Adam, in that you are the same as us ; if you 
do not trust in the precious blood of Jesus Christ, our 
middle man, all is vain and useless. The Holy Book 
says, ' Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou 
shalt be saved/ but ' he that believeth not shall be 
condemned.' Do lay these words to heart. Would 
that all of you would earnestly pray God to interest 
the minds of many of your countrymen to come to 
China and point out the way to heaven. Revered 
master, no more, but all the boys in the school join 
in salutations to you. 

" Written by 

" Sl-NUE." 

Lip to that time much seed had been sown, but 
little fruit gathered in ; we had evangelised in nearly 
all the villages around the city. Frequently we 
would start in the morning, taking lunch with us, 
preaching in various villages ; my husband gathering 
the men, and I the women, under some spreading 
tree. Many heard, but, alas, few believed that Jesus 
was the only Saviour. But is it not always so ? We 
need constantly to remember the promise that " He 
that goeth forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall 
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his 
sheaves with him." It is for us to observe the con- 



"OUR LORD IS ABOVE ALL GODS" 67 

ditions " precious seed," the Word of God ; " weep- 
ing hearts " longing for souls, that will not be satisfied 
without fruit. As the result of our first ten years' 
labour a little church of only eighteen or twenty was 
formed ; how meagre apparently the return for so 
much labour : we had often in those days to assure 
ourselves of His faithfulness, who has said, "In due 
season ye shall reap if ye faint not." But besides 
this mere handful of Christians there were many 
hopeful inquirers, and during our absence of eighteen 
months thirty-seven were baptized on profession of 
their faith. 



CHAPTER VI 

"And He said unto them, Lacked ye anything? And they said, 
Nothing." LUKE xxii. 35. 

ON the ist of April, 1877, Wenchow became an 
open port. It was a new thing for us to see a 
steamer in the river, and we had a feeling almost of 
intrusion when we went on the hill and met other 
foreigners there. The state of my health in that year 
rendered it necessary to take a furlough to England, 
and we left by the first trading steamer that came to 
Wenchow. Mr. Stott had been over eleven years in 
China, and his health being good, he at first thought 
of sending me home while he remained at his post. 
Mr. Taylor, however, kindly suggested he should take 
me, and that suggestion was carried out. 

At that time the little girls were beginning to grow 
up, and we felt keenly the need of a separate house 
for them. The state of the mission funds did not 
encourage us to look to them for the rather large sum 
that would be needed to build a girls' school-house. 
We took our need to the Lord, told Him if that work 

63 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" 69 

had to be carried on a home must be provided for 
them. We decided to make no appeal of any kind, 
not even to mention our need publicly, but that we 
should tell our private friends of our desire, and leave 
the rest to God. 

We told Mr. Taylor of our plan, and said we 
thought 250 would be needed ; he said he thought 
not less than ^300 would suffice. We had asked 
the Lord for 250, but we told Him about the 300, 
and if it was needed to send us that sum. When we 
returned to China in the autumn of the following year 
we had received unsolicited 304, besides having 
spent 10 upon school materials ; it was another 
of the " exceeding abundantly " which the Lord has 
ever loved to give us. We had decided together 
that we should limit our own expenses to the sums 
received from the mission for our own support, and 
whatever gifts were given to us should be put to the 
school fund. 

During this time we had some very singular expe- 
riences. When in Ireland my husband was asked to 
address a few Christians who lived in a quiet out-of- 
the-way village ; the people were poor, they had 
nothing to give but their prayers ; but Mr. Stott felt 
prayer was a mightier power than money, so he went 
seeking to interest these godly people. The meeting 
was held in a farmhouse ; not more than twenty were 
present, but they were deeply interested in all they 



70 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

heard. When the meeting was over, one and another 
pressed up to shake hands with the missionary, and one 
woman, with tears in her eyes, pressed a coin in his 
hand, he putting it into a pocket where there was no 
other money. When he retired to his room he looked 
to see what the coin might be, and was deeply touched 
to find it one " halfpenny." He felt it was like the 
" widow's mite," and at once knelt down to ask God 
to bless her gift. He then entered in his book, " A 
poor woman unknown, a halfpenny." Next day 
when he returned to me he said, " I was deeply 
humbled, and had to confess to God that if I had had 
only a halfpenny to give I should have been too 
much ashamed to have put it into the hand ; she had 
much more faith and love than I." Then he added, 
"Do you know God seems to have shown me that 
He is going to send $o." I answered, " Oh, I have 
not faith for that, but according to your faith be it 
unto you." We then knelt down together and asked 
God again to bless that woman who had so nobly 
given all she could, and was not ashamed of the 
smallness of the sum. 

The next day we went to spend a few days with a 
friend in another part of the country. The day after, 
while the lady and I were out for a drive, our host 
came to the room where my husband was writing, 
and said, " God has told me to give you this money 
for your work." He put down a bundle of notes 



"LACKED E ANYTHING f" 71 

and left the room. On counting them Mr. Stott 
found there were just 50! It was entered as the 
next donation to the halfpenny, and up to this time 
we had never received more than 5 in a single 
gift. 

We then went on to Dublin, where we were hos- 
pitably entertained by a dear Christian couple, and 
while sitting by the fire recounting the Lord's 
wonderful dealings with us, my husband mentioned 
the incident of the halfpenny and 50. He then 
added, much to my confusion, " And I have the same 
strong conviction, that God is sending me $" 
When we retired to rest I asked why he had said 
such a thing. " It was as good as asking, and no 
doubt next day when we are leaving $ will be 
given." He answered, " Oh, I never thought of 
that, but of course I can explain and refuse." Next 
day, as I expected, a cheque for 5 was handed ; my 
husband refused to touch it, expressed his regret for 
having mentioned his conviction in the way he did : 
it was all right to tell of what God had done, but 
what He was going to do seemed too like a hint, and 
if he wished to spare his feelings he must not ask 
him to accept this. Our host replied, " That $ was 
given to me two days ago by another ; it is not my 
money at all. My wife and I laughed when we went 
upstairs ; it is no use trying to cheat you, for God 
evidently tells you beforehand." 



72 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

These are a few of the remarkable ways in which 
God supplied all our need very abundantly. Our 
visit home was productive of much interest and 
prayer ; I had specially asked that friends would 
plead that some suitable woman might be converted 
who would be a real help in work amongst others, for 
up to that time we had only one Christian woman, 
and she was over seventy. I felt the drawback of 
being alone, and longed for such a helper. Little did 
we think that, while they prayed, God was working 
out His own plans in that direction. 

We arrived back in Wenchow on the last day of 
1878 ; two days afterwards I was asked to visit two 
women who were interested in the truth and wanted 
to see me. Oh ! what good news ! two women in- 
terested in the grand story of the Cross. Of course I 
went without delay, and was delighted to find them 
not only interested, but truly converted. They told 
me that one of our members, a firewood seller, had 
every time he brought their wood, sat down to tell 
them of God and His Christ. At first they were 
indifferent, but by and by they began to long for his 
coming, that they might hear more and more. After- 
wards they were visited by schoolboys, and others 
who could teach them. One of these women men- 
tioned how in former years she had closed her door 
when she saw me coming up the street, lest I should 
try to get into her house as I did others ; but 




Mrs. Liu, our former Bible-woman ; her son, now labouring in Tai- 
chow ; his wife, a former school-girl ; and their three children, 
the eldest of whom is converted. 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" 73 

added, " Now I am longing for you to teach me 
the Bible." 

This lady, Mrs. Liu, was of a refined literary family, 
and when young was married to a man of wealth ; 
but alas, he, his father, and two brothers were opium 
smokers, and as they had no business of any kind, 
the property grew less and less each year, until the 
death of her husband. After paying his debts she 
had but a remnant of property left, not enough to 
keep herself and son at that time a lad of seven or 
eight. After her husband's death she gave herself up 
very largely to the worship of idols, but in that she 
found no comfort for her weary spirit. 

The other woman was a working man's wife, Mrs. 
Oae, very bright and earnest. Her husband was 
bitterly opposed to her being a Christian, and would 
not allow her to attend any services, nor would he 
consent to any Christian visiting her in her home ; 
but as these two women lived in opposite sides of the 
same house, he could not prevent our going to Mrs. 
Liu's, nor his wife from listening. 

I at once began a Bible-class each Wednesday 
afternoon in Mrs. Liu's house. Neither had ever 
attended a Christian service one prevented by her 
husband, the other too much ashamed to be seen 
outside. Now I look back with great joy to the 
time spent teaching those women. Their hearts 
were indeed opened, and eagerly they drank in the 



74 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

precious words of life ; week by week they repeated 
almost word by word the lesson of the week before, and 
it was wonderful to see their rapid growth in grace. 

One Wednesday I went as usual, but found Mrs. 
Liu was not at home. Mrs. Oae told me that her 
mother-in-law had died two days before, and that she 
had been called to the funeral ceremonies : she left a 
message that we were to pray for her, as she did not 
know what to do under such circumstances. So that 
afternoon, instead of our Bible lesson, we spent the 
time in prayer, that God would keep His child in the 
midst of difficulty and sore temptation. 

The next two or three days I was very anxious 
and much in prayer for her. I feared the effect of 
all the deadening influences of idolatry ; wondered 
if she would have courage to confess Christ before 
her proud literary relations. 

Three days afterwards she came to see me, and 
the first glance of her told all was well, for her 
face fairly beamed. Her first words were, " It is 
wonderful, wonderful ! God stood by me all the 
time." She then told me that when being carried 
in her chair she was greatly perplexed what to do, 
and could only cry, " God, help me to glorify Thee." 
When she arrived and saw all her relatives going 
through the idolatrous ceremonies, her heart smote 
her, and she felt she must confess Christ. She 
called them together and told them how that, since 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" 75 

they had last met, a wonderful change had come over 
her : she had heard of a true and living God, who 
could wash away her sins and make her more happy 
than any earthly treasure could ; that the knowledge 
of an everlasting home in heaven was more than 
earthly gain, and that though she and her son were 
the nearest relatives, and had a right to most of the 
property of the deceased, yet she could not offend 
God by performing the necessary ancestral rights. 
Her son was young, but she hoped he, too, would 
become a Christian by and by, and that he must not 
undertake those rites either. She therefore gave up 
all claim to the property, and would leave it with 
themselves to give what they thought right, on the 
understanding that she and her son would be for 
ever free from ancestral worship. She also added 
that they began to ask what kind of a religion it was 
that could make her do such a thing, and so, she said, 
" for three days I have been doing little else but 
telling them of Jesus, and just before coming away 
God let me know I had glorified Him, for I heard 
one of my relatives say, ' That must be a good 
religion, for if you searched the city through you 
could not find another who would give up property 
like that.' " 

I am ashamed to say that they only gave her the 
sixteenth part of what she ought to have had, but 
with that she got a written statement that at her 



;6 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

decease none of them were to interfere with her 
funeral, or perform idolatrous rites. For many years 
she has been a faithful and valuable helper in the 
work here. Her son was trained for several years 
under Dr. Douthwaite, and there converted. He is 
now doing medical work in the city of Tai-chow. 

Mrs. Oae, who had been prevented by her husband 
from making any public confession of her faith, began 
to feel an earnest desire to be baptized : I counselled 
waiting upon the Lord in the matter, hoping that her 
husband might give consent. One day on going to 
the class she told me, with a beaming face, that her 
husband was going away next day to do some work 
in the country, and would be away till the following 
Monday or Tuesday. She said, " For three days I 
have been praying that God would open up my way 
to be baptized, and this is His answer." I reminded 
her that it was very cold weather (we baptized by 
immersion, and the baptistry was an open one in our 
courtyard), and asked if she was not afraid. She 
answered, " Oh, no ; God has given me this oppor- 
tunity, and if I do not take it He may never give me 
another." 

I was a little doubtful about her taking this step 
without the knowledge and consent of her husband ; 
but she seemed so certain that God had given her a 
chance not to be thrown away, that I could but be 
silent. 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" 77 

On Saturday evening she came out for the first 
time in her life to a Christian service, and gave 
such a testimony to the power and preciousness of 
the blood of Jesus Christ as quite astonished the 
little group of Christians. She was unanimously 
accepted by them for baptism the following morning, 
after which she joined in our communion service. 
How strange it must all have seemed to her ; she had 
never seen memorials of Christ's broken body before, 
but her Spirit-taught soul greatly rejoiced at being 
able to join with others in thus publicly remembering 
her Lord. 

After the afternoon service she returned home, 
and had only just laid aside her outdoor garments, 
when to her astonishment in walked her husband. 
He saw from her appearance she had been out, 
and questioned her, when she boldly acknowledged 
she had been to the chapel. He grumbled some- 
thing about being disgraced in the eyes of his fellow- 
workmen by his wife going after a foreign religion, but 
on the whole took it very quietly, much to her relief. 

This dear woman led a bright, earnest, consistent 
life for some years. She was one from whom I 
had hoped much, but one Sunday morning in 1888, 
while we were in England, she died quite suddenly 
just as she was preparing to go out to the service. 

About this time (1879) another bright woman was 
converted. She impressed me so much by her intelli- 



78 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

gence and ability to receive the truth, that for about 
two years I went regularly to her house one afternoon 
each week to teach her. Work in China in the earlier 
years had to be done among the ones and twos. For 
two years I carried on two classes a week, one com- 
posed of two women, the other only of one, but it was 
well-repaid labour, for the lives of these three were 
bright and shining witnesses for Christ. This woman, 
Ah-Chang-na, was very poor, yet had a joy in giving 
to the Lord that surprised us all ; for when we began 
our native women's missionary band, she was one of 
the most regular contributors. Day by day, from her 
housekeeping money, she would put aside one cash 
for God, and often in the middle of the month she 
would bring the money to me to keep for her, lest in 
her extreme poverty she might be tempted to use it. 
She had a young family, and could do little beyond 
her household duties ; but if she earned a little money 
with her own hands, she always gave one-half of it to 
God as a thank-offering. 

I remember, one New Year's time, at our native 
missionary meeting, telling the women God would be 
no man's debtor, and that whenever we from a true 
heart desired to spread the knowledge of His name 
and gave what we could ill afford, He would be sure 
to reward. I looked to this woman for confirmation, 
and said, " Ah-Chang-na, you are one of the poorest 
of us, yet you have given to God this year more than 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" 79 

ever before, and more than any of the others ; will you 
tell us how God has dealt with you has it been 
harder for you to pass this year than formerly ? " I 
asked this in faith, yet tremblingly, not knowing what 
the answer would be. With a beaming face she 
declared, before all, that at the end of the year, after 
paying off her little debts, she had one dollar left 
upon which to enter a new year, and, she said, " never 
in my whole life have I had one dollar to begin the 
New Year with before." We did praise God for that 
blessed testimony, and often has it been quoted since. 
This dear woman, too, passed away in 1888, while we 
were at home in England. 

It seemed to us so sad, that two out of our three 
brightest and best Christians should be called away 
so near each other, and at a time when they seemed 
more than ever needed. Before they were called 
home, however, they saw a goodly band of women 
gathered out of darkness into God's wondrous light. 
I must say, Ah-Chang-na was a Christian who never 
gave me an hour's anxiety, so consistent and bright 
was her life throughout. She had much power in 
prayer, and literally prayed her husband and mother 
into the kingdom. We had a meeting amongst the 
women every Thursday afternoon, especially to pray 
for unsaved relatives, and this dear woman often broke 
down while pleading for others. It will be interesting 
to note that during the first few years of its existence, 



8o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

no fewer than four husbands, and seven children, of 
our praying women were brought to the Lord. 

It was outof this prayer-meeting grew our Missionary 
Band. I was a little perplexed to know how to get 
them out of the narrow groove of themselves and cir- 
cumstances, into interest in and sympathy for others. 
I knew it would be a benefit to their own souls to do 
something for those around. We began in a very 
simple way, contributing what we could once a month, 
to enable one of their own number to go out as a 
Bible-woman. Mrs. Liu was chosen, and, as long as 
health permitted, faithfully represented them. This 
Missionary Band was a great blessing to the women 
themselves ; the missionary information I was able to 
give them, month by month, stirred up their hearts 
and interest and stimulated prayer, besides producing 
a self-denying spirit in the matter of giving. This 
Missionary Band has now (1895) been in existence for 
ten years. Of course it has grown with our Christian 
women, and for some years they have almost entirely 
supported their own Bible-women. Our schoolgirls, 
though having no money of their own, were most 
desirous of helping in this effort ; a barber had to be 
called twice a month to shave the heads of the little 
girls according to the Chinese custom, and one day 
the elder girls asked if I would allow them to do the 
head shaving. I asked why ; they replied, " We do 
want to help with the Bible-women, and we thought 



"LACKED YE ANYTHING?" Si 

if we could do the work instead of the barber, the 
money might go to the missionary fund." I was only 
too glad to accede to their wish, and the effort has 
been continued ever since by those, who in turn, become 
the elder girls of the school. 

In the summer of 1879, we began building the girls 
school for which God had so graciously supplied the 
funds. At first we intended only to build a house 
large enough for a school, but felt led to build instead 
a double house, where the school could be at one end 
and our rooms at the other, so that I might be in a 
better position to superintend them ; and also that the 
native house we had lived in for ten years might be 
available for a married couple whom we hoped would 
soon join us. With our enlarged plans we knew we 
should need more money, but as this seemed the right 
thing, and God had proved Himself so faithful in the 
past, we felt sure He would supply unasked all that 
was needed. 

The house was to be built by piecework, and we 
determined to go on only as far as we had money 
in hand. We paid men and materials week by 
week ; twice we thought we should have to tell the 
head workmen to withdraw their men for a time, and 
twice fresh supplies came before that was necessary. 
The whole was finished without a single day's stoppage 
for want of funds, and of course without one penny of 
debt. We had to wait a little time before we could 

7 



82 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

put up the necessary outhouses ; but they, too, were 
provided in answer to believing prayer. 

These buildings, native houses, chapel, &c., were all 
destroyed in the riot of 1884. 



CHAPTER VII 

" If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up 
his cross daily, and follow Me." LUKE ix. 23. 

AS soon as building operations were finished, 
regular itinerations were again commenced, 
mostly by Mr. Stott alone, as the girls' and women's 
work occupied my time more and more. He had to 
make occasional visits to Chii-chow, which was then 
an out-station from Wenchow, as well as to Bing-yie 
and Dong-ling, where the work was growing steadily. 
Referring to a few of these journeys, Mr. Stott writes : 

" Jan., 1 880. My dear Mr. A., When yours came 
to hand I felt conscience-stricken ; there was no time 
to reply, as I was just starting for Chii-chow. I had to 
go up the river ninety miles in a small miserable boat ; 
the weather was very cold, a bleak north wind, sleet 
and hail driving in our teeth. The boat cover was in 
such bad condition that I had to compel the boatman 
to get a new one ; and by urging and coaxing I reached 
my destination in a little less than three days. 

"On both sides of the river there are many villages 

83 



84 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

and small towns which have not yet been visited by 
any Christian. I trust I may be able to give them 
the offer of salvation ere long. Every one travelling 
in China and seeing the countless towns and villages, 
with their thousands of inhabitants, could not remain 
unmoved ; they are born, live, and die, generation after 
generation, seeking nothing higher than to have enough 
to eat and wear, and leave a small portion for their 
children. 

" On arriving there, it was no better than the boat 
for comfort the hail came through the roof and left 
no place dry ; the room where my bed was had only 
two sides to it, and I can assure you the ventilation 
was perfect ! However, the day following, I got some 
boards and a carpenter and closed it in a bit, but then 
all the light I had was through the tiles. The silver 
lining in my cloud was a small stove, which I had 
brought with me, and I assure you the warmth from 

was grateful to a degree. I remained there four 
days, and tried to strengthen the hearts of those who 
are looking forward to the house of many mansions 
in the skies. 

rt More recently I have been to Bing-yie, south of 
Wenchow, and spent a very happy time, having met 
thirty persons all interested and more or less instructed 
in the truth. There are ten or twelve more in the 
same country, but as they live a long way off I did 
not see them. Ten of the best out of the thirty were 



"IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME" 85 

invited to come to the city and spend a little time 
with us in Bible study. There are a good many 
inquirers in the district where I go to-morrow, and 
perhaps three or four may be accepted. Last Lord's 
day, a woman came about sixteen miles, and got one 
of the Christians to introduce her to us. She wanted 
to be ' baptized and made a disciple of Jesus.' After 
talking to her some time, we found that she and her 
husband had been taught by one of the native Chris- 
tians, who sometimes visit their village on business. 
Their idols were thrown away some months ago, and 
the husband had been to the chapel a good many 
times, but never made himself known. 

" We expect Mr. and Mrs. Douthwaite, of our Mis- 
sion, soon. They have been six or seven years in 
China and he has practised medicine, I believe very 
successfully. We hope that blessing may follow his 
medical work here ; but he is far from strong, and it 
is doubtful whether the damp climate of this district 
will suit his health. Mrs. Stott and I do a little in 
the practice of homeopathy. Mrs. Stott got a nice 
chest from Mr. R., whom we met in your brother's 
house at Pinner. Mr. R. also gave me a small bottle 
of a special preparation called ' Neuraline; said to be 
an instant cure for sciatica. I tried it once when an 
attack was coming on, and in half an hour the pain 
was gone. I left the bottle in the bedroom, and when 
the old woman went to make the bed she was attracted 



86 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

by its fragrant, pleasing smell; afterwards, on meet in.". 
the old withered beauty, I could not make out what 
she had been anointing herself with, as she really 
distilled fragrance at every step, and, as the cook 
remarked, 'You could hear the fragrance of her all 
over tlu- yard.' Hut when I discovered my loss, I 
felt as an Iri-.hman at I. mini. I. on. .- <; |>i <,,<<! him 

self, ' An' shure it was a little riled that I was, iur. J 

" I hope you are not thinking too highly of the 
C.I.M. It is not perfect, nor ever will be as long as I 
am connected with it ; hut it is as near perfection as 
any mission I know of. I am glad you are no enemy 
to system and order in connection with service for our 
Master ; if there was no organisation or system I do 
not think the C.I.M. could do as good or as much 
work as it does, and instead of less, I think we need 

more of it. Did it ever strike you that some of these 

good men who are so afraid of system in the Lord' . 
work are yet very systematic in their habits? Take, 
for instance, their systematic reading and study of 

(iod's Word, meeting \vith kindred spirits lor prayer, 

&c,, at stated hours and places, which many of them 
would not forego for any worldly gain. To give an 
illustration of this kind of inconsistency, I met in - 
a good man and pillar of the church of - , and we 
talked about missions in general and the C.I.M. in 
particular. He liked the mission very well, but was 
afraid it was running too much into system ; he com- 



"7F ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER Ml:" 87 

plained that a council was now formed in London, 
Hudson Taylor was Bishop in China, and every 
member was under his thumb: that he used his 
power rather unsparingly, and perhaps it was a mis- 
taken that he should have so much power over the 
brethren. My part, of course, was to defend as best 
I could ; then the conversation turned upon our own 
work in particular. I told him much of what had 
IHVII done, and more that was still undone, and tin 
conclusion he came to was, that one man could not 
do well the work on hand. To ease his mind I informed 
him that Hudson Taylor had promised me help as 
soon as circumstances would allow ; a young man, or 
perhaps two, would join me soon. So far, so good ; 
did I know either of the young men ? I could not 
say that I did. Then he said, ' It was most important 
that a proper understanding should exist, to begin 
with ; the work was already established, and if some 
young man or men were to join who would not work 
willingly on the lines already laid down, but upset 
here and overturn there, they would do more harm 
than good, and damage the work of the Lord by un- 
skilled hands.' I told him it was understood by all 
parties that the new-comers must work on the lines 
already laid down, and were not at liberty to tear up 
old or lay down new ones. He felt relieved and 
happy then, and said, ' That was just as it should be/ 
but the dear man did not see that he had cut away 



88 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

the foundation from his own remarks about Hudson 
Taylor having control over the members. I think it 
is a scriptural thing for the younger to be in submis- 
sion to the elder. Yea, more than that, if it is not put 
into practice, confusion will be the result, as is often 
but too plainly seen. 

" Two Sundays ago we had eight persons baptized 
here, who gave us much comfort and hope, which I 
pray may not be disappointed. Others, by God's 
grace seem to be pressing forward. For some time 
past, I think the Spirit of God has been helping me 
in making the way of salvation through Christ clear; 
for oh, it is hard for them to understand the precious 
truths, their minds are so dark. Yesterday was the 
Lord's day, and I think His Spirit was with us in 
power. At evening prayer the word spoken seemed 
to touch every heart, and at the close I asked two of 
the brethren to lead us in prayer. One of the 
Christians prayed first; then an inquirer began for the 
first time. Inquirers are not expected to pray, but I 
did not like to stop him ; he is an elderly, grey-haired 
man, venerable in appearance and highly esteemed by 
all who know him. At first I feared his attempt would 
cause an explosion among the young folk, but to 
their credit be it said they behaved better than your 
scholars would have done. I think his simple earnest- 
ness overawed every one, and at the end there was 
such a hearty ' Amen ' from all present as if they 



"IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME" 89 

really meant to thank God for opening another mouth 
to worship Him. This old gentleman and two of his 
neighbours had been constant attendants for about a 
year. There is no doubt that they like the gospel, but 
whether they are all subjects of the saving grace of 
God it would be hard to say; but I think the one who 
prayed last night is. 

" It is very good of the Lord to give us even a little 
success. We are so unworthy of it, but He saves 
in spite of our unworthiness. Thirty-four in all have 
been gathered in since our return a year ago. It is 
much to thank God for, but what are they among the 
many thousands who hear as though they heard not ? 
Many listen for a long time before they ever dream 
that any object of worship can or ought to exist 
besides what they already possess." 

A little later he writes : " Since writing you last 
we have accepted and baptized ten persons ; most have 
been coming to the services one, two, or three years. 
Last Lord's day the chapel was full, and in the after- 
noon Mrs. Stott had thirty women in her class; she 
calls this a class for teaching them the Scriptures, but 
I fancy there is some preaching goes on as well. I 
have not been there to see, but I think most of her 
meetings contain more or less of the preaching 
element ; but as long as souls are saved and God's 
blessing rests on them, I think it would be a mistake 
for her to stop, even if the Archbishop of Canterbury 



90 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

were to condemn her. The Lord has given His seal, 
and that is what we look, long, pray, and give thanks 
for. This year, 1881, more have been gathered into 
the church than any one year since the work began ; 
but during this time a few have been put under 
discipline: one man long in fellowship, and who had 
a good deal of influence and had been the means 
of bringing a goodly number under the sound of the 
Word, has departed from the faith and godliness, and 
since his suspension has been behaving in a very un- 
becoming manner. These things are our trials, but 
the work is the Lord's, not ours, and He will bring 
into His kingdom all that are His. Satan seems to 
have greater power than ever in hurting the saints of 
God, by causing many to turn from the faith and 
accept unsound doctrine. It all points to the fact 
that the Lord is at hand. I sometimes so long for 
His appearing, because our whole hope for the Church 
and the world is centred in His coming to take the 
government of the world into His own hands ; the 
sadness and suffering all around is great indeed, the 
misery day by day is appalling. 

" As an instance, only last month a poor man, in a 
country village, whose daughter was ill and supposed 
to be dying, had, according to custom, lighted two 
candles, put them in paper lanterns and hung one at the 
head and the other at the foot of the bed. He then 
fastened both door and window and went on to the 



"IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME' 91 

top of the house to call back his daughter's spirit. He 
stood and called long, and during the time one of the 
candles fell down and set the bed on fire before the 
people of the house knew it, and then they could not 
get in ; by the time they reached the fire it had 
taken such a hold that six houses were destroyed 
before it could be conquered. The man's daughter 
was burnt to death, as well as a woman in another 
house ; and a young man was so severely injured in 
trying to save his family and property that he died 
the next day. More than half the fires that take 
place in China result from idolatry or from opium 
smoking. 

" I have lately come in from the Dong-ling station. 
I had a good time on the whole, but a shake of ague 
prevented me from extending my journey. Concern- 
ing four persons baptized, one or two things were a 
little remarkable. One lad was about fourteen years 
of age ; I have only once baptized one so young 
(Z-ntie), and he is now twenty-two years of age, and 
went into the water with them and performed the rite. 
I only hope this lad may turn out as well. Two others 
were husband and wife ; the fourth, a very nice young 
woman, daughter of two of our Christians, is married 
into a family who are opposed to the truth, and has a 
great deal to bear for Christ's sake, and seems to bear it 
cheerfully. She was engaged to be married into this 
family before she or her parents heard the gospel." 



92 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

(In after years this young woman led her husband 
to the truth, and gained the goodwill of her other 
relatives, so that her mother-in-law, though never a 
Christian, was changed from a persecutor into a friend. 
I remember when visiting there, the mother-in-law 
spoke gratefully of her daughter's goodness.) " I 
thank God and take courage, but must confess that 
every time there is a baptism I am rilled almost as 
much with fear as with joy fear lest I should have 
committed any mistake, or that Satan may lead 
them away into sin, thus causing shame and dis- 
honour to God and His Word. 

" Here in the city we baptized three persons last 
week, and hope to receive more soon. Some of them 
have been giving us much comfort ; they are mostly 
from Mrs. Stott's Bible-class. The Lord has been and 
still is blessing her efforts among the women, many 
of whom seem to accept the truth more readily than 
their husbands, and also walk more consistently than 
the rougher sex. Indeed some of our best Christians 
are women, and Mrs. Stott has often told me that at 
their prayer-meetings they seem to unburden the very 
secret of their souls to the Lord, and confess their 
sins, temptations, and failures with an openness and 
earnestness unknown at home ; they often pray for 
twenty or twenty-five minutes at a time. They begin 
with their hearts full almost to bursting, and are not 
happy till they have told all their story (not the half) ; 



"/F ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME" 93 

and having told it, their faces beam with delight, and 
they go on their way strengthened with faith, hope, 
and love. Prayer is very real to them, and the 
answers as real. At the same time there is a good 
deal of persecution ; at one place some have been 
badly beaten, and at another they are afraid almost 
daily that their houses will be pulled down and them- 
selves maltreated. 

" I think I told you that one poor woman who was 
ill-used last year never recovered from the effects of 
the cruelty she was subjected to, and has lately died. 
At another place an old man had his house set on 
fire twice ; he was at last driven away, and is now ill, 
not expected to live. Another is a very sad case ; a 
brother's wife died, and the neighbours would not 
allow him to bury her without going through all the 
heathen rites for the dead, nor would they allow him 
to bring the coffin into the village, nor carry the 
corpse out. Several of the members went to visit 
him, but they were beaten, one of them very badly. 
At last our brother escaped, and ran here as if for his 
life. We had a good deal of trouble in arranging the 
matter, and ere then the corpse was much decayed. 
Then the neighbours insisted upon the other Christians 
performing the rites, and on their refusing they were 
beaten, and their hands bound and tied to the bed 
over the decaying corpse, while the heathen neigh- 
bours went through the rites ; they then brought in 



94 MISSION WORK /AT CHINA 

the coffin, and tied two of the Christians to it by their 
tails. 

" I hope the trouble is over now, and that we 
have strengthened our position. It seems impossible 
to advance one step without stirring up the devil, and 
having to maintain our ground inch by inch. I pray 
this may be a real blow at the supremacy of his power 
in that place. There are a few inquirers there, and 
when Mr. Jackson went up to see about the burying 
of the brother's wife, all the Christians and inquirers 
came to see him, except one young man who was tied 
up to a post by his father lest he should catch the 
* Jesus disease.' He had been too late in tying him 
up, for he caught the disease more than a year ago, 
and now the father finds it difficult to cure him. 

" There are others I could tell you of, suffering the 
loss of their little all for Christ's sake. Since I wrote 
you last the Lord has been blessing us ; one Lord's 
day we had ten persons baptized and last Sunday 
three. There is a spirit of inquiry abroad in many 
places, but we are much hampered for want of native 
assistants. The people are willing to hear, but we 
have hardly any one to tell them the way of salvation. 
We have been specially crying to God about this 
matter. We have few in the church fitted for teach- 
ing others, and it takes a long time to train so as to 
fit them for this work. Our hope and confidence is 
in God ; He has provided many things for us, He is 
able to provide this also. 



"IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME'' 95 

" I came in from the country yesterday ; had a 
rainy, disagreeable time, and some unpleasant things 
to do. Satan seems to break loose every now and 
again, and do all the mischief he can to the Christians. 
One man who steadily refused to contribute to the 
support of the heathen temple had half his standing 
corn cut, and what was left was trampled, so that he 
suffered a serious loss ; others have had their farming 
implements broken to pieces, been denied the use of 
the public road, and annoyed in many ways, for they 
are adepts in the art of petty persecution. It is surely 
a testing time for us all, and makes me long for the 
time when our Lord Himself shall come and save His 
own out of the hand of the wicked. 

"July i, 1884. This is quarter-day, when accounts 
have to be made up and despatched. A great deal of 
pastoral work has claimed my attention of late. My 
dear wife is feeling fagged out with extra work, and I 
give her an hour's help daily. We are hard worked 
certainly, but thanks be to God, His presence is with 
us, sustaining and helping. Last Saturday evening I 
was up until II p.m. examining sixteen candidates 
for baptism ; eleven were accepted, and baptized on 
Sunday morning, and afterwards sat down at the 
Lord's table. Some of those deferred will soon be 
received, I think, as they were put off only until some 
family matters could be arranged. This year we have 
already received thirty-two, and I hope God will give 



96 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

us a great many more before the end. I long to get 
into that state of soul-communion with God in which 
the good man is supposed to be, when * all he doeth 
shall prosper.' 

" The rumours of war so near us have given me a 
good deal of extra work. Many of the Christians in 
distant places are having rough times ; the heathen 
are persecuting them fiercely, but as yet no blows 
have been struck. The Romanists are getting it 
worse than we, and a rupture has taken place, but I 
have not heard the details. The Chinese are not so 
enlightened as to make much if any distinction be- 
tween one foreigner and another ; here they distinguish 
our nationalities by our religion : Protestants are 
British and are very bad they produce the opium ; 
Romanists are French, they are even more abomin- 
able and ought to be exterminated. Such is the ex- 
pressed feeling of many. Our most southern station 
is near the border of Foh-kien, and with hostilities 
going on so near there is much to try them. There 
is also a great deal of excitement in the city, and 
some days we can hardly walk out without being 
reminded of the dislike with which many regard us ; 
they will sometimes get behind us and make a harsh 
whirring noise like sharpening a knife, and if they can 
draw our attention will take their fan and make a 
significant slash at their necks, and then disappear as 
soon as they can. But if matters do not get worse 



"IF ANY MAN WILL COME AFTER ME' 97 

we will be thankful ; the Lord reigneth, and our con- 
fidence is in Him. I do not go out more than I can 
help, and so far have been treated with respect. The 
mandarins seem in earnest in trying to keep the 
peace, and have issued a good proclamation. I am 
told they have soldiers parading the streets and secret 
spies loitering about, and any detected stirring up the 
people are taken to the Yamen and soundly thrashed. 
What we all fear is bands of marauders, who are 
always on the alert to embrace the first opportunity 
of plunder that presents itself. 

" But our souls are in God's mighty hand, and our 
bodies too ; and He will take care of us till our work 
is done. We are more anxious about our friends in 
the far interior, and daily pray that they may be kept 
in peace ; we trust their distance from the seat of 
hostilities may be some protection to them. 

" I propose to send Mrs. Stott to Shanghai for a 
month, when the cool weather comes. She has had 
heavy work during the summer, and is purposing 
taking in a number of women during the winter for 
Bible instruction that they may be the more intelligent 
witnesses for our Lord and Saviour. There is a great 
difference between a well-taught Christian and an ill- 
taught one I mean in their being able to bear witness 
for Jesus. If we can only give all the native converts 
a good hold of the Scriptures, we might in a great 
measure dispense with native preachers." 



CHAPTER VIII 

; Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing ?" 
PSA. ii. i. 



THERE was at this time a war between France 
and China, and during the summer of that year 
the French had bombarded Foo-chow, sunk several 
gunboats, and destroyed the arsenal there. Foo- 
chow was the next port south of us, and when the 
news came of these disasters the people were greatly 
alarmed. The excitement was increased by the 
officials issuing orders that each household was to 
provide a basket of stones, which were to be placed 
in junks and sunk at the mouth of the river, to block 
it in case the French should come here. All July 
and August the excitement prevailed, and had a riot 
happened then we should not have been so much 
surprised ; but things quieted down and our fears 
were allayed. 

It was during this summer that the conversion of 
the six girls of which I have spoken took place ; new 
life had brought new desires for further teaching. 



" WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE f" 99 

At the end of September my husband insisted I 
should go to Shanghai for a fortnight's rest, before 
beginning some fresh work contemplated for the 
autumn. My last words were, " I can go away con- 
tented and happy, for the people are so quiet and 
contented again " : little did I anticipate the blow that 
was to fall so soon. 

On Saturday evening, October the 4th, just one 
week after I had left, while Mr. Soothill, of the 
Methodist Free Church, was conducting their usual 
prayer meeting, a few rowdies collected at his chapel 
door and noisily demanded admittance ; when the 
door was opened they ran away. This was repeated 
two or three times, and on the door being again 
opened several rushed in throwing stones, and evi- 
dently bent on mischief. Some one raised the cry, 
" Burn the foreigners out," and almost before the 
words were uttered they lighted torches, and, with 
paraffin oil, set the place in flames. The chapel was 
close by the house, and Mr. Soothill, fearing a general 
conflagration, went to the Yamen to beseech help. 
The magistrate, thinking Mr. Soothill might meet 
with bodily injury, refused to let him out again ; but 
he, accompanied by some soldiers, went in the hope 
of quelling what had now become a serious riot. He 
was told, however, he had better go back ; the people 
were bent upon mischief, and he might get injured in 
the fray. His chair was, indeed, considerably bat- 



ioo MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

tered, and, mandarin like, he thought discretion the 
better part of valour ; and the soldiers sent to intimi- 
date the rioters joined with them in their evil work. 
When Mr. Soothill's house, chapel, and all he pos- 
sessed were in ruins, they made for the Roman 
Catholic premises. The poor priest had a hard time 
of it ; frightened almost out of his senses, he lay hid for 
three days in the firewood house of a friendly neigh- 
bour, and was at last disguised as a Chinese coolie 
and taken to the Yamen. The destruction there was 
thorough also ; the mob now seemed like tigers who 
had tasted blood, and they determined to make a 
clean sweep of everything belonging to the hated 
foreigner. From the Roman Catholic place they 
went to Mr. Jackson's, of our own mission, and when 
they reached our chapel, only three minutes' walk 
from our house, Mr. Stott felt it was time to seek a 
place of safety. 

Dr. McGowan, of the Chinese Customs, had, at 
great personal risk, come to Mr. Stott's help. They 
collected our sixteen school girls (the younger of 
whom had to be taken from their beds), servants, and 
all others within our gates, in order to seek shelter in 
the magistrate's Yamen. As they went out at the 
back gate the first contingent of the rioters burst in 
at the front, and in a few moments were in possession 
of the place. Happily the Yamen was near, or it 
might have fared badly with them, for they were 



"WHY DO THE HEATHEti fcAGfrf '' Vor 

freely pelted with stones, one of which struck Mr. 
Stott's pith helmet a heavy blow, which made his 
hat roll on the ground, and caused him to run 
the gauntlet bare-headed. A moment after Dr. 
McGowan staggered under the blow of another, 
and the frightened school children, who were cling- 
ing to his coat-tails, were scattered here and there. 

When they reached the Yamen several of the girls 
were missing, and our cook, an active, earnest man, 
went out in search of them, but it was the next day 
before the family was complete ; two or three of them 
spent the night in a temple courtyard, scarcely daring 
to breathe, lest their hiding-place should be dis- 
covered. I have said complete, but there was one 
dear little thing three years of age, pet of the house- 
hold, who was carried off, and we never saw her 
again. 

In a few hours the destruction was general, not 
only the effects of the missionaries, but also of the 
foreigners in the Chinese Customs employ ; every- 
thing foreign was destroyed : they showed a nice 
discrimination, for the latter, who lived in old temples, 
had all their goods, furniture, &c., carried out, even 
partition boards and flooring which they had put 
down, burnt in the front yard, while the buildings 
were left intact. 

After completing their work of destruction in the 
city they tried to reach the English Consulate, which 



WOflAT /AT CHINA 

is situated on a small island in the middle of the 
river ; but the magistrate had anticipated their inten- 
tion, and had ordered all boats to the other side. 
They tried to make a raft, but failed, and the next 
day the homeless refugees were escorted by a strong 
band to the island. 

On the Monday the rioters went to our country 
chapel in Dong-ling, twenty English miles away, and 
burnt it also to the ground. We all shared the same 
fate, proving that the feeling was anti-foreign, not 
anti-missionary. The officials acted with creditable 
promptness in paying the indemnity demanded by 
the consul, and in six weeks from the date of the riot 
Mr. Stott was able to return and begin rebuilding, 
leaving our school children in the kind care of Dr. 
and Mrs. Lord, of Ning-po, who most unselfishly 
received them into their school, although it was at 
the time quite full, and kept them under the care of 
their own matron, Mrs. Liu, for five months, during 
which time we were rebuilding. 

It was an anxious time ; the war had upset our 
steamer communication, and Ning-po was blockaded. 
For three months we were without letters, and heard 
vague rumours of the bombardment of Ning-po and 
flight of the foreigners there, which happily proved 
untrue ; while they, poor things, suffered also through 
false reports concerning us. But in all this the Lord 
kept our hearts resting upon Himself. The news of 



" WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE t" 103 

Mr. Stott's arrival soon spread, and it was a great 
joy for pastor and people to be united once 
more. 

In February, 1885, Mr. Stott writes: "My dear 
Mr. A., I have just finished the duties of the day, 
and will now indulge in the pleasure of a chat with 
you ; you are one of my oldest friends, and that gives 
me license. I am here alone as yet, for my dear 
wife could not leave Shanghai owing to the death of 
Miss Minchin and, indeed, I was not in a state to 
receive her sooner. After getting official liberty to 
return I came by first steamer, and at once began to 
search for a temporary home. After many failures 
the Lord gave me success. I have bought a small 
house adjoining my former property, and I am now 
living in it in tolerable comfort. I had to pull down 
the ruined walls of our dear old home, and I must 
confess it cost me many a pang to stand by and see 
it done ; and our dear little garden, which was such a 
pleasure to my wife, all disfigured, not a plant, shrub, 
or even a weed left. We had a large number of 
flowers in pots, which were mostly thrown down the 
well. At every corner were signs of the most wanton 
destruction. Surely their mischievous ingenuity came 
from near the bottom of the bottomless pit. And 
now quiet has been restored, the mandarins are doing 
very little to bring the rioters to justice. Many of 
the native Christians have been looted of their all, 



104 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

and the mandarins will not even look at their peti- 
tions for redress. 

Very few out of China have any idea of the 
weakness and corruption of the Mandarinate and 
their hatred of all Europeans. Those brought to 
justice are comforted and consoled by the mandarins 
telling them that they must apprehend and punish 
them through pressure, for the " foreign devils " are 
very cruel, and destitute of any mercy. 

I am now rebuilding, and the girls' school will be 
finished next month, also the chapel at Dong-ling ; 
our own house is some distance on, but the city chapel 
still lies in abeyance. Hitherto the Lord has helped 
me, and I do need His help, for I am poor and 
needy. 

The British Consul has entered into the case with 
much spirit, and has done for every one as well as he 
could. Two instalments of the indemnity have been 
paid, and another is almost due. 

I am glad to say I have found nearly all the 
Christians have stood firm, only one having gone 
back. He seems to have lacked stamina to endure 
the long strain they were all exposed to after 
I left for Ning-po ; and as I was over a month 
absent, it was a testing time for them all, for the 
worst was over before I could return. Others 
have got a new start, and are bolder in the 
faith than formerly, and some new converts have 



" WHY DO. THE HEATHEN RAGE f" 105 

been drawn out ; so on the whole I do not think we 
have lost much, and may be all the better for this 
searching. It has been a time to bring out all that 
was in us, both natives and foreigners ; but those 
who put their trust in God shall never be ashamed. 
Ever since the night of the riot the Lord has been 
showering blessings on us, and since the buildings 
began we have not been stopped an hour by rain. It 
has come now, but the roofs are on, and no harm or 
hindrance will result, which is a boon." 

We had, about that time, two hundred Christians 
and inquirers, and out of that number only two 
turned back through fear. The poor, scattered flock 
had met in little groups in each other's houses, the 
stronger visiting and cheering on the weaker and 
more timid. Mr. Stott arrived on Friday and at once 
set a few men to clear away the debris and erect a 
few upright poles and cross-beams, over which were 
thrown bamboo mats ; and by Saturday afternoon the 
extempore chapel was ready to receive the flock who 
came to welcome their pastor back. And what a day 
of thanksgiving it was, both rejoicing together. God 
was very gracious to us in this time of sore trial ; the 
blow had been especially heavy, because unexpected. 
We had gone through so much in the earlier years, 
had lived down opposition and hatred, had gathered a 
goodly number of warm-hearted Christians it seemed 
as if our difficulties were over and we had reached the 



106 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

reaping time; but with one stroke all our hopes ap- 
peared laid in the grave yet, only appeared. When I 
received the letter from my husband which told me 
everything we possessed was destroyed, and that he 
and the helpless band of eighteen natives were in 
Ning-po and had taken possession of a large empty 
house, homeless and almost clotheless, the blow seemed 
cruel; yet, at the same time, God brought His own 
Word to my comfort. It was as though the question 
was asked afresh, " Why do the heathen rage and the 
people imagine a vain thing?" that one word vain had 
a power I never felt before. Thank God all should be 
vain, we should yet go back, gather our scattered 
people, build up our ruined home and chapels, and 
win many more souls for our Lord and Master. The 
vision rilled me with hope and comfort, and when, 
three hours afterwards, I left to join my husband, it 
was with a heart profoundly thankful, for had not the 
precious lives been spared, and was there not good 
hope for the future ? I thought God had comforted 
me, so that I might be able to speak words of cheer 
and comfort to the dear ones who had passed through 
the storm ; but when we met next morning they had 
no need of my comfort God had gone before and 
cheered them with His own assurance that all would 
yet be well: and wonderfully did God fulfil His pro- 
mise, for on the first Sunday at the opening of our 
new chapel, five persons were baptized and received 



" WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGEf" 107 

into the church ; and for years after, few months 
passed without some being added to our number. 

We had been told that no indemnity would be paid 
until we had first sent in an inventory of all our losses. 
Anxious to get back as soon as possible, we set our- 
selves to prepare an inventory to forward to the Consul 
by the first steamer which should return from Wen- 
chow. In all former cases, months of negotiation had 
preceded settlement, and though we feared delay, we 
determined it should not be on our side. What was 
our astonishment, when the Consul wrote by the first 
steamer to say that the magistrates had accepted the 
rough estimate of losses, which had been handed in a 
few days after the riot, and that the first instalment of 
money should be paid in a few days. 

Thus, my husband was able to return as soon as he 
could purchase clothes, &c., and was received by the 
people as kindly as if a riot had never taken place. 
For five months he personally superintended the 
building operations. Many men were employed, so 
that the school and chapel might be finished with as 
little delay as possible. 

Services were held each night for the workmen ; but, 
with that exception and our Sunday services, our 
missionary work was at a standstill. One day, upon 
my remarking to Mr. Stott that he was building sub- 
stantial walls, he replied, "I want to build this specially 
strong, for I believe Christ is coming very soon and 



io8 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

the Jews are to be the evangelisers of the world, and 
when they come to Wenchow it is my desire they shall 
find a place ready for them." 

About a year after this, we had a letter from the 
Rev. David Hill, of Hankow, saying that he had just 
baptized a man who dated his first interest in the 
Gospel to the time of the riot. He had come to Wen- 
chow on business, and when he saw the missionary 
robbed of all he possessed, pelted with stones, making 
his way very quietly to the Yamen without one word 
of cursing or bitterness, such as he expected; and 
when, a few weeks later, that missionary returned 
quietly to rebuild, with as much grace as if all the 
city were his friends, he said to himself, the religion 
which could bring forth fruit like that was worth 
inquiring into. On returning to his home, he attended 
Mr. Hill's chapel, and was in due time baptized by 
him : thus the Lord gave us fruit in the very midst of 
the fire. 

But we were not allowed to go without personal 
suffering. We were living in a low, damp Chinese 
house, and the wet season coming on, we were 
compelled to move into the new home before it was 
dry. Miss Littlejohn, a young missionary, who had 
joined us but a few months, was taken seriously ill and 
died in the autumn of the same year at Che-foo. I 
take an extract from a letter written to a friend at 
this time: 



"WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE?" 109 

"September 14, 1885. 

" DEAR B., Very many thanks for your cheering 
letter received two weeks ago. Just when it came 
we were getting weary and discouraged, and your 
sympathy cheered us not a little. It is not often we 
feel down-hearted, but I fear we are somewhat in that 
condition at present. We are still left single-handed 
(Miss Littlejohn being away invalided), and we begin 
to feel the strain heavier than we can bear. We do not 
mind hard work, but it is discouraging to feel that, 
work as we will, one half is left undone. I have now 
twenty-five girls entirely under my care, who need and 
ought to have all my time. The dear ones who were 
converted last year are growing in grace, and their 
thirst for the Word of God must be satisfied. On the 
other hand, the Christian women and inquirers need 
much teaching, and in trying to do both, neither is done 
thoroughly. The same is true of my husband. The 
church in this city has grown to need all his time and 
care, yet he is grieved that the out-stations are not 
visited oftener. May our Father lead us in a right 
way. I am sure you will pray for us. Miss Littlejohn, 
who joined us last December, may be ill for a long 
time ; she was very delicate and, indeed, seemed worn 
out when she came. In the beginning of summer she 
took ill. After a few weeks she went on to Shanghai, 
and was there two months without getting any better; 
she has now gone to Che-foo, where I trust she may 



no MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

gain strength. She is a dear, earnest Christian, and we 
love her much, but we fear she is too delicate for this 
trying climate. 

"Let me now turn from the afocouraging to the 
#couraging. I never like to look long at the dark 
side, it does not pay ; we need all the hope and joy 
we can bring into this work, especially in such a dry 
and thirsty land. Praise the Lord, we find Him a 
well-spring in the desert ; He gives strength according 
to our day, filling our hands full of sheaves and 
causing our hearts to rejoice, so that we should not, if 
we could, change places with any one. 

" Month by month, some are coming out on the 
Lord's side. At Bing-yei, where Mrs. Liu has gone 
for a month, quite a number have put away their idols 
and are inquiring after the truth four young men at 
one hamlet, three women at another, and so on. Mrs. 
Liu has gone to teach them. At the same place, one 
of our old Christians passed away lately; he was an 
old man and failing for some time. One day he felt 
unable to get up, and said to his wife that Jesus was 
coming for him soon ; in the afternoon he asked for 
some food, and when he had taken a little, he said, 
' Jesus is coming for me now, I will just sleep a little 
till He comes; don't wake me.' He fell asleep and 
never opened his eyes on earth again. (This was the 
old man found worshipping in the temple by the 
schoolboy Z-niie.) 



"WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE?" in 

"At another station, Dong-ling, where there are 
about forty Christians, eight families have put away 
their idols and are asking after the truth ; no doubt 
some of them are chosen of the Lord. 

"As soon as the weather gets a little cooler, my 
husband hopes to take on some young men students 
again, and I a few women, for training during the 
winter months. I can take in ten or twelve women to 
teach, without adding very much to my labour. They 
can share morning and evening Bible classes with the 
girls, and a class every afternoon for them would be 
all the extra work it would give me. We have also 
begun a boys' day school ; this was much needed for 
the sons of the Christians, and there are ten pupils. 

" This has been a very sickly summer ; a kind of 
cholera and dysentery has carried off many victims 
two of our women died within a few days of each other, 
and several others are still very ill ; all around us can be 
heard the death-wail. We have given medicines and 
saved a few lives. One of our girls is very ill with 
dysentery. We trust it may please the Lord to restore 
her. My husband began a boys' school seventeen 
years ago, and though we have had schools ever since, 
we have never had one death either among boys or 
girls. This, for the first few years, was in answer to 
prayer. We had to win our way amongst the people, 
and we felt that a death in the school might, in those 
early days, be the means of driving us from the city. 



H2 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

But, in this, as in everything else, the Lord has given 
us more than we asked. 

" I will now close with the good news that four 
more were baptized yesterday. Since May, twenty- 
seven candidates have been examined, and out of that 
number fourteen have been accepted and baptized. 
They have all been inquirers one, two, or three years. 
The mind works slowly in China, and it is often long 
after they hear the truth that they lay hold of it. 
We like rather to wait and be sure, as it is saved 
souls we want, not numbers." 

My husband and myself both suffered, and it was 
then seeds of the disease in Mr. Stott, which two 
years later compelled us to go to England, were 
sown, and afterwards developed into the painful 
complications which in the spring of 1889 ended in 
his translation to glory. Thus we were called to be 
sufferers together with Christ in no ordinary way, 
yet no word of regret ever passed his lips. He was 
full of praise that God had enabled him to serve 
more than twenty years in China. 

In the beginning of the year 1886, my husband 
felt much led to ask God to give him at least one 
soul each Sunday ; week by week he kept this 
request before the Lord, pleading there might be no 
barren week during the year ; and at its close we 
were much interested to find that just fifty-two 
persons had been added to our church. I remember 



" WHY DO THE HEATHEN RAGE f" 113 

my husband looking into my face with a sad expres- 
sion as he said, " Why did I not ask more ? Oh, how 
we limit God, when He might do great things for 
us if only we would open our mouths wide unto 
Him ! " 



CHAPTER IX 

" And ye shall be witnesses unto Me." ACTS i. 8. 

IT will be interesting to give a few instances of the 
kind of men and women whom God has chosen 
as instruments for the furtherance of His own work. 

In 1880 Mr., now Dr., Douthwaite had for a time 
a hospital in this city for the cure of opium-smokers, 
and amongst the degraded applicants was a silver- 
smith named Li Ao-ming. This man was in the last 
stage of degradation and poverty. He had to borrow 
the dollars necessary to ensure his admittance into 
the refuge, and the only shirt he possessed was 
borrowed too. He had a bold, defiant, repulsive 
look, had been an opium-smoker for many years, and 
was such a desperately wicked character that his 
own mother did not like to own him. After he had 
been in the refuge a few days he began to take an 
interest in the services held by the assistant, and 
slowly his mind opened up to receive the truth ; few 
knew what was going on in the man's mind until 



"WITNESSES UNTO ME" 115 

one day, when going upstairs to his room, another 
opium patient deliberately spilt the dirty water he 
was carrying down over Ao-ming's clothes ! Instead 
of flying into a passion and cursing the man, as he 
would have done a week or two before, he stepped 
down until the man descended ; then looking him 
steadily in the face, said, " If you had done this to 
me a week ago, I would have cursed you, your 
parents, and your ancestors for generations ; but I 
have heard of the love of Jesus, dying for such guilty 
men as we are, and I will not curse you again." 
When the time came for him to leave, having got 
rid of that terrible opium habit, which is as a chain 
which closely binds its poor victims, he begged to be 
allowed to remain a fortnight longer, so that he might 
learn more of the precious truth. As soon as he left 
the refuge, he went home to tell his mother and two 
brothers of the wonderful gospel which he had heard 
and believed, and which had changed his heart and 
made him hate the things he loved before. His 
mother and brothers were much interested and 
began to attend the services. They lived in a part 
of the city where no work had been begun, and at 
my request the mother opened her house for a 
meeting once a week. This was continued for over 
a year, so that the neighbours had the opportunity of 
hearing of a Saviour's love. The mother became a 
true Christian, and more than a year afterwards fell 



n6 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

asleep rejoicing in her Saviour. His two brothers 
were baptized with him, but one of them has shown 
by his life that he was never saved, and was expelled 
from the church four years afterwards. The other 
brother still remains with us, but has never been 
much more than a dead-and-alive Christian. 

Ao-ming very soon took up his trade again as a 
silversmith. Sometimes he would be two days in a 
village, sometimes a week, according to the amount 
of work he had to do, but every night after the day's 
work was over, and every Sunday wherever he 
happened to be, he spent in telling the glad good 
news. He was a wonder to himself, and as is often 
the case with such people, he was mostly taken up 
with telling what God had done for him. His 
earnest, fearless manner arrested attention, and it 
was not long before we had many inquirers asking 
for more teaching, saying the silversmith had first 
told them of a Saviour's love. His zeal sometimes 
went beyond his knowledge, and we had often to 
undo some of his work, but he was much used of 
God nevertheless. 

After some years my husband, being in need of an 
evangelist, decided to try the silversmith. He worked 
both hard and earnestly, but he had an overbearing 
manner which spoilt much of his work, and after a 
time he was allowed to go back to his trade as being 
the best thing for a man of his disposition. It was 



"WITNESSES UNTO ME" 117 

all the same whether he was a paid evangelist or a 
working silversmith, preach he would, and preach he 
did, and he was the means of the salvation of many 
souls. He has never been an easy man to guide ; 
bold, hasty, and self-conceited, he has had to be kept 
in with a firm hand, but when his faults are firmly 
though kindly pointed out, he often confesses with 
bitter tears. About five years ago he opened a shop 
in the village of Bahzie, about thirteen miles from 
here, and after settling his shop affairs, the next 
thing he did was to look out for a room in which he 
could preach on Sundays, the rent of which he paid 
himself; and on the first Sunday morning he closed 
his shop, hanging a board outside which announced 
that no business could be transacted that day, and it 
was well known that the time was spent in preaching. 
After a time a number of inquirers gathered round 
him, and it became necessary to have a chapel. This 
matter he took up entirely himself, giving what he 
could and seeking help from the city Christians until 
he had received about seventy dollars. With this 
money he tiened (mortgaged) a small house, which 
he had repaired and put in order for a chapel, and 
since he has become the pastor of this little self- 
supporting church. But though doing a good work 
the people sometimes get tired of him, for after all 
there is a great mixture of Christ and Ao-ming in all 
he says ; still God has blessed and is blessing his 



n8 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

labours, and we rejoice, though, if we had our way, he 
would be a different man. Once a month we send a 
fresh preacher to help the few Christians. Ao-ming 
is now a prosperous tradesman, liberal and open- 
handed, very hospitable, and in spite of many faults 
we praise God for him. On the anniversary of my 
twenty-five years' work in Wenchow, he felt very 
proud to present me with a silk banner entirely on 
his own account, as a token of his love and esteem. 

Boa-sang-tsang, former firewood seller : I cannot 
recall anything about this man's conversion. He was 
baptized in 1877, about the time we left for England 
on our first furlough. By the time we returned at 
the end of 1878 he had already won several persons 
to Christ. He was very poor, carrying his firewood 
from door to door, but in whichever house he entered 
where he had opportunity he preached Christ to the 
inmates. It was thus Mrs. Liu and others were won 
to Christ. Fearless and utterly careless of rebuke, it 
could be said literally that as he went he preached. 
After a few years of such soul-winning, he was sent 
out as an evangelist ; faithfully and earnestly he 
worked, never weary, though often unwise. Later on 
my husband had, for a time, to suspend him from 
preaching, because he had taken needless offence at a 
trifle, and seemed to be doing more harm than good 
amongst the Christians. He was spoken to very 
gently, but firmly, and helped back to his old trade 



"WITNESSES UNTO ME" 119 

again for a short time ; but his repentance was truly 
beautiful, and when in 1887 we left on our second 
furlough, it was very touching to see Mr. Boa, though 
suspended as a preacher, following my husband's chair 
weeping like a child, proving that " faithful are the 
wounds of a friend." The year after he was made a 
colporteur, and ever since has been doing noble work 
in that line. He has been the means of opening up 
many new districts, one of which, O-dzing, had very 
soon afterwards to go through the baptism of fire. 

O-dzing is a small village situated amongst the 
hills, about fourteen miles from Wenchow. The first 
believers were mother and two sons of a well-to-do 
family. Mr. Boa remained two or three weeks in- 
structing them in the truth, and quite a number in 
the village began to show interest. The head-man 
of the district, feeling annoyed at the desertion from 
the ranks of those who supported the idols, deter- 
mined, if possible, to intimidate the believers. After 
Mr. Boa left, a younger and more inexperienced 
preacher was sent, and while he was there persecution 
began. The preacher was beaten, and the Christian 
and her son tied up by the thumbs until she should 
recant. An attack was then made upon their house, 
the inmates had to escape out of doors or windows 
any way they could, while everything within was 
either smashed or stolen. The granaries were 
opened and the grain carried away. The family fled 



120 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

to Wenchow, and the matter had to be put into the 
Consul's hands, and it was over a year before a settle- 
ment could be arrived at. Both sides suffered heavily. 
The Christians, who had lost over two hundred dollars, 
were only compensated to the extent of fifty-two 
dollars ; while it cost their enemies three hundred 
dollars to get the case out of the Yamen. This has 
left a bitter feeling which has never been entirely 
uprooted, and the gospel has been much hindered in 
that place through it. 

It is remarkable that in every case where a lawsuit 
has been necessary, hindrance to the gospel has been 
the result. We have always found it better for both 
Christians and heathen to settle disputes in a friendly 
way out of court. This becomes increasingly easy as 
the heathen gain confidence in the just judgment of 
the missionary ; when they find that he does not take 
the part of the Christian because he is a Christian, 
they are willing to submit the case to him and abide 
by his decision. This is the last case of persecution 
which I have had to deal with through the Consul 
and I trust it will long remain the last. We have 
had many troubles since, but I have never failed in a 
friendly settlement. 

Another interesting case was that of a husband and 
wife who had formerly been beggars. They had one 
little girl, whom they betrothed to a little orphan 
boy, who had a small house and an acre or two of 



"WITNESSES UMTO ME" 111 

ground. Yaih-zing-pah and his wife worked this 
little bit of ground diligently, which, however, only 
supported them part of the year ; for the rest they 
had to beg. Wandering into the chapel one day, he 
heard the gospel preached, believed the truth, and 
was baptized in 1883. As soon as the little boy's 
relations knew, they insisted he must either give up 
this new doctrine or their relative. Everything was 
done to induce them to change their decision, but in 
vain. Yaih-zing-pah told them he could not give up 
Christ, who had done so much for him, saving his 
soul and giving heavenly riches which were beyond 
all this world could bestow. There was nothing for 
it but to turn out again into the cold world as home- 
less beggars. Mr. Stott advised him to get work if 
possible, and for this purpose gave him a little money 
to erect a hut on an uncultivated hill, which he was 
allowed to work for a merely nominal rent. Surely 
never were twenty dollars more usefully invested. 
Ten dollars were spent on building a house and ten 
dollars upon farming implements ; the good couple 
setting to work with a will. They asked if their 
house might be used for services on Sunday, so that 
those living near might hear the gospel. One day, a 
young man came to their door begging. He was 
the victim of the dreadful opium habit, of a respect- 
able family, and could read well ; but cast out from 
his home, he had no resource but begging from those 



122 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

nearly as poor as himself. Our friends told this 
young man of the God they worshipped, who was 
able to help him to break off the opium. They 
invited him to stay with them, promising to give him 
his food if he would work. In the meantime they 
taught, helped, and prayed with him until the desire 
for opium was overcome, and he felt himself a free 
man once more. This poor fellow, the fruit of their 
labours, has been an earnest, consistent Christian for 
the last ten years, and is now an unpaid local 
preacher. He continued working with them as a 
son, and three years ago was married to a deaf-and- 
dumb girl (he was too poor to pay for any other), 
and a year after she was received into the church. 
She is in all things consistent, but we can never know 
how she received the truths of the gospel. 

Yaih-zing-pah and his wife were also the means 
indirectly of opening up Tung-tso work ; a beggar 
family called, who were friends in their old begging 
days, and were as usual invited to stay a few days and 
hear of Christ. After their begging tour of a few 
months they returned to their home in Tung-tso, and 
began to tell their neighbours of the new doctrine 
they had heard, but did not believe. This created 
interest, so that when Mr. Boa some time afterwards 
on a book-selling tour visited the place, he found 
quite a number of people desiring to be taught. Upon 
his report we sent a preacher, and thus the work was 



"WITNESSES UNTO ME" 123 

begun in a district which heretofore the truth had 
never entered, and we have now a little church with 
out-stations. These beggars never believed the truth 
for themselves, though they were the means of stirring 
up interest in others. Amongst the believers in that 
place were four young lads, very bright and earnest. 
These we brought into Wenchow for two years' Bible 
training ; two are now unpaid local preachers in their 
own district, while earning their living as farmers, and 
two are learning useful trades in the city, and teach 
in Sunday school. 

A few months ago Yaih-sing-pah's wife was 
crossing the river in a boat with twenty others, 
when on her way to the chapel ; a strong wind 
capsized the boat, and our dear sister and sixteen 
others were drowned. We mourn her untimely end ; 
they had lost their daughter, who was a bright little 
Christian, some years ago, and now the old man is 
left alone in his sorrow. 

Another worker is Mr. Dzing, who was brought to 
us when quite a little lad ; his mother was dead, and 
his father a wretched opium-smoker, who had sold his 
younger brother for a few dollars to a man who took 
him off in a Fuhkien junk, where he knew not. He 
was about to sell this little fellow, when a relative 
rescued and brought him to our school. He was a 
nervous boy, and for months Mr. Stott was pained to 
see him timidly shrink from him ; but love and kind- 



124 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

ness won its way, and he became quite confiding. His 
father left the district and troubled no more about 
his child, who was thus left absolutely on our hands. 
He was a quiet, studious lad, and it was seldom we 
had to find fault with his conduct ; he was good and 
obedient, and outwardly all we could desire, but 
several years passed before the truth took possession 
of his heart. When he was old enough he wanted to 
learn foreign printing, and our mission press being 
in Chin-kiang, we sent him there in the hope he 
would learn that trade. The reports we had of his 
conduct were satisfactory, but there was no one to 
teach printing, and as far as learning the trade was 
concerned it was a failure. He had the advantage, 
however, of going to several places, visiting Japan 
amongst the others, so that he returned to us quite a 
travelled Chinaman. About 1878 he was converted 
and began to take part in preaching, and after a while 
he was employed as an evangelist and did good work, 
until in an hour of temptation he fell into sin, and 
had not only to be dismissed from preaching, but 
suspended from the church. His repentance proving 
sincere, he was restored ; and three years after again 
became a preacher, and has ever since been a faithful, 
earnest, and most helpful worker. He is now pastor 
of the Bing-yie church ; it was formerly an out-station 
from Wenchow, but is now itself a centre, having out- 
stations of its own. 



" WITNESSES UNTO ME " 125 

One of our disappointments in connection with the 
young man was his marrying a heathen girl in 
preference to a Christian, because the latter have 
large or natural feet ; the disgrace of a wife with 
these seemed more than he could bear, when there 
were but few such, and each one had to bear reproach. 
Now it is different. Not only have our girls in- 
creased in numbers, but many of our Christian women 
have unbound their feet, and are no longer the laugh- 
ing stock of their neighbours. Mr. Dzing did not 
suffer from this false step so severely as some have 
had to do ; his wife was a quiet, nice girl, and after 
some years was converted, but she has never been 
much help to him, either in the home or in spiritual 
life, through the lack of early training. 

Another of our old boys is Mr. Tsiu ; he was the 
first lad brought to Mr. Stott when he began his 
school in 1868. A more hopeless-looking, blank- 
faced boy you could hardly meet, and had it not been 
for the necessity of making a beginning with any kind 
of material that was brought to one's hand, he might 
never have been received. His father was dead ; his 
mother a hard-hearted woman from the Fuhkien 
border, who had drowned two of her girls kept a low- 
class inn, and was utterly without principle ; his elder 
brother was a wretched opium-smoker. This boy had 
been born paralysed down one side, and it was be- 
cause he could neither work nor walk properly, and 



126 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

was therefore only a burden, that he was brought to 
the foreigner. 

Mr. Stott's faith in the power of God was great, 
and he trusted that even this unpromising lad might 
yet be a useful witness for Christ, and he was not 
disappointed. He learned quickly and became a 
good scholar ; he had been in the school about four 
years, and understood well the plan of salvation, 
though he had not accepted it. Our old Ning-po 
woman induced him to read the Scriptures to her 
every night, and on one occasion she said to him, 
" How is it you can read so beautifully and yet don't 
believe ? " He replied, " I am not good enough." 
" Oh," she answered, " you are like the man who went 
into the feast without the wedding garment ; you 
don't want Christ's robe, but are trying to make your 
own do." A few nights after he dreamed a strange 
dream : he thought he heard the trumpet announce 
the Lord's coming ; that in terror he got up, dressed, 
and went out to meet Him. When he got into the 
courtyard he thought he saw Mr. Stott going out of 
the gate ; he called upon him to wait, but Mr. Stott 
answered, " No, the Lord has come : I must go out to 
meet Him ; you are not saved, you must be left 
behind." In terror he awoke, and was glad to find it 
only a dream ; but the next day, on telling his 
strange story to one of the Christians, the question 
was brought home, " What if it had been true ? " He 



" WITNESSES UNTO ME " 127 

saw his danger, and at once yielded his heart to the 
Lord, and we have never had cause to doubt the 
reality of his conversion, though some weak points 
have often given us sorrow. He became an eloquent 
effective preacher, and was for several years my hus- 
band's right hand. 

When he was about twenty-eight years of age, his 
mother, without consulting him, engaged him to a girl 
from a disreputable family. We feared that such a 
union could only lead to trouble, and strongly urged 
him to cancel the engagement. This he several 
times tried to do, but his mother always went into 
floods of tears, and the girl said the disgrace would 
be more than she could bear, and that she would 
certainly drown herself. The sight of his mother's 
tears and the girl's distress would overcome him, 
and they were not slow to see their advantage. We 
tried every way to get him out of the difficulty, even 
offered to refund the money that had been paid for 
her, for we could foresee that a girl brought up as 
she had been, and with the evil tendencies which she 
undoubtedly had, could be nothing but a curse to 
him. For a few years he waited in the hope that 
some way would be found out of the difficulty, but at 
last he married her, much to our distress. It turned 
out as we feared : a blot and a curse seemed to follow 
him ; his Christian life, bright and unsullied, began 
to be heartless ; he hardly dared to lift his head 



128 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

among other honourable men, for his wife, careless 
and extravagant, brought him to endless difficulties. 
Again and again he was helped, only to have the old 
story repeated, his wife could not keep out of debt. 
Several children were born, but were ill cared for. 
He began to lose the respect and confidence of the 
church members, and at last we had to remove him 
from being pastor, through no actual sin of his own, 
though certainly through his weakness, for a stronger 
minded man would have managed better. 

He is now a teacher of the language to two of the 
young ladies. It is seldom one can set aside God's 
revealed will without suffering, and he has suffered 
sorely. Many a time he has said to me, "If her soul 
were only saved, I could wish her dead." Still in 
many ways he is useful, both in taking gospel meet- 
ings and Bible classes. 



CHAPTER X 

" How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, 
and bring glad tidings of good things !" ROM. x. 15. 

Z-NUE was another of our schoolboys who was 
much owned of God ; he was brought to us when 
about eleven years of age. I well remember seeing a 
little bright-faced lad led in, clad in a rather nice 
though worn silk garment. I was surprised to see a 
boy of such well-to-do appearance, for surely, thought 
I, the father who could clothe his son in silk, could 
afford to give him rice ; for up to this point no one 
had come to the school for the sake of the education 
and training, in every case they were too poor to give 
them food. Now here is an exception, thought I, the 
first of a superior set of boys. But alas ! the next 
morning the father came with a profuse apology the 
silk garment had been borrowed, and must be returned 
to its owner ; and when it was taken off, oh ! what 
rags, and dirty rags too. I had at once to have new 
clothes made for the little fellow, and the old ones 
burnt. From the first he took a liking for us ; there 

10 



130 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

was nothing of the shyness and fear that most ex- 
hibited for a few days. Some of the other boys 
would laugh at him when he came up with a bright 
smile, perfectly fearless, to share with me some of the 
beans and nuts, or anything else that had been given 
to him, and when he could get a flower to present me 
with he was highly delighted. Slowly the truth began 
to take possession of his young mind ; with him there 
was no sudden conversion, but rather a gradual taking 
in and understanding of the truth ; but the change in 
his life was no less decided, and when he was fourteen 
years of age, there being no doubt in our minds as to 
the reality of his conversion, he was baptized and 
received into church fellowship. He continued his 
studies for a few years longer, and it was in the mean- 
time, while still considered a schoolboy, that he went 
to Bing-yie, and was the means of the conversion of 
the old man, worshipping in the temple, mentioned 
before. 

For fourteen years afterwards he was a consistent, 
godly, and earnest Christian, and for nearly ten years 
of that time a faithful preacher. He contracted 
disease of the lungs, and in spite of every effort to 
save so valuable a life, God took him when he was 
about twenty-eight years of age. Eternity alone will 
reveal how many he was the means of leading to 
Christ, for winning souls was almost a passion with him. 

When he was about twenty-five years of age, his 



" THE GOSPEL OF PEACE " 131 

parents, without his knowledge or consent, betrothed 
him to a young girl of fourteen, and at this we were 
greatly grieved, for we had hoped he would have married 
a Christian from the school, and thus be helped in his 
work. However, engagements entered into by parents 
are not to be set aside, and there was nothing for it 
but to try and get the girl into the school, and to 
seek by God's blessing to win her to Christ. The 
parents on both sides being willing she was brought, 
under a written agreement, to remain with us for five 
years ; when she arrived from the country she was 
taken first of all to her future husband's home, and 
introduced to the family as their daughter, and by 
them brought to us. She was a very pretty girl, 
bright and more obedient than most were when first 
they came to us. We were therefore the more sur- 
prised when three or four days afterwards she dis- 
appeared ; we searched everywhere, sent to the young 
man's home, but no trace of her could be found. A 
messenger was sent to her own home, where she was 
found quietly doing household work ; she had run off, 
asked her way to the north gate, took her passage in 
a boat without any money to pay it, and arrived at 
her mother's house after six hours' journey. It was 
the most plucky thing I had ever known a Chinese 
girl to do, and when she returned with the messenger 
I decided to take very little notice of the escapade, 
thinking that fear of the foreigner was the cause ; but 



132 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

when about a week after that she was caught in the 
act of running away a second time, we decided to take 
some action. I put her in a room and told her that, 
not having time to speak to her now, I must lock the 
door, as she was not to be trusted. It was more than 
an hour afterwards before I could return ; I asked 
her to tell me plainly what her difficulty was ; why did 
she run away ? No answer. Was she afraid of me ? 
She said " No." Were the other girls unkind to her ? 
She answered " No." Why then had she run away, 
for no one had ever done so before ? For a time she 
was silent, but I encouraged her to speak, promising, 
if it was anything I could remove, it should be done. 
She then opened up her heart quite freely. She said 
she had been engaged contrary to her own wish, and 
when she was brought to the young man's home, and 
saw how very poor they were, and that even their 
language she did not understand (they were Tai-chow 
people), she determined she would not marry him. 
But, I said, you don't know the young man himself, 
you have never seen him ; if you did, perhaps you 
would change your mind. But she answered, " No ; 
I would like to stay here, and if you will promise me 
I need not marry into that family I shall stay and 
do all you tell me." I pointed out how impossible 
it was for me to give such a promise, that the engage- 
ment contracted by parents on both sides was binding ; 
"but," I said, "I can promise one thing, that if you will 



"THE GOSPEL OF PEACE" 133 

wait quietly for three years, during which time you 
will have opportunities of seeing the young man ; if, 
then, after knowing him better, you are still of the 
same mind, still unwilling to marry him, I will use my 
influence with him, and I have little doubt but that 
he will release you." At that her face brightened ; 
she said, " If you will promise me that, it will be all 
right ; you need not lock the door, for I shall not try 
to run away again." And from that time she scarcely 
ever gave me an anxious thought, being both obedient 
and affectionate, learned quickly, and became a true 
Christian. Before the three years were over the young 
man's mother died, and she of her own accord put on 
mourning for her, thus showing that she had accepted 
him. 

When we left for England in 1887, Z-niie was 
evidently dying of consumption, and we, fearing his 
father might sell her to some other man, obtained, 
with the girl's consent, a document from him handing 
the girl over to us, we on our part promising to return 
the betrothal money paid by his father ; so that after 
his death she was perfectly free. She was later on 
married to a Christian young man. 

Another interesting case was that of Ling-ah-chang, 
who lived outside the east gate ; he was an iron- 
beater by trade. I cannot now recall the incidents 
of his conversion, but he became a very earnest, 
useful Christian. He started a meeting in his 



134 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

mother's house, so that the neighbours around might 
hear of Christ, and became quite eloquent in preach- 
ing. His mother and brother were converted through 
his instrumentality. After two or three years he 
became a useful local preacher. In 1888, when we 
were in England, Mr. G. engaged him first as an 
evangelist and afterwards as pastor of a small church, 
and from that time he has been doing good and 
earnest work. His dear old mother died last year, a 
most triumphant death, rejoicing in the prospect of 
being with Christ, which she realised was " far better." 
He married one of the girls from the school, and she 
has been a great help in work amongst the women. 

Mr. Tsie was a native of the Dong-ling district, 
where he worked at his trade, that of a shoemaker. 
About seventeen years ago, when twenty-two years 
of age, he first heard of the " foreign doctrine " 
through a Christian relative of his who lived near 
by. This Christian at last persuaded him to attend 
the Sunday services held at our chapel ten miles off. 
Mr. Stott went there once a month to instruct the con- 
verts, and, assisted by good native preachers, faithfully 
told out the gospel story. The young man attended 
pretty regularly for about two months, but under- 
stood very little. Nothing of the precious truth 
seemed to enter his heart or find any lodgment there. 
He would sneer to himself as the believers sung the 
hymns which sounded so outlandish to him, and 



" THE GOSPEL OF PEACE " 135 

would say to himself, " Well, those are barbarian 
sounds ; those who believe this foreign gospel will 
turn rebels soon, and we shall have a rebellion in 
the country." After that he relapsed into his old 
ways, and absolutely refused to accompany his 
relative to the services. Some months passed, 
when, without any apparent preparation or cause, 
a great change came. 

One day he was sitting outside his door mending 
shoes. In front was a large tree ; and, as he looked 
at it, he began to consider the trunk, branches, and 
leaves. There they were, sure enough, but where 
did they come from ; there must be a root, even 
though unseen by him. Then it flashed across his 
mind that that was just like the world. Here was 
he ; here were his neighbours and friends, and before 
them their fathers and grandfathers and more distant 
ancestors ; but, surely, to all, there must be a root 
some great ancestor above them all. There and 
then he realised the truth that there is a God from 
whom we every one have our being. 

From that day forward all was changed. When 
he wakened in the morning he felt like a new man, 
and forthwith, ignorant as he was, he began preaching 
the great truth that had taken possession of his heart. 
It was some months after this change before he got 
assurance that his sins were all forgiven ; but he dates 
his conversion from that day, when, as it were, God 



136 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

commanded the tree to preach a parable to him. 
He understood little of the plan of salvation, and 
could not read a character in the Bible, but he spoke 
out what he knew. He told of the one true God 
of how He has given us all good things we possess, 
and yet we daily sin against Him ; and how we all 
were deserving of hell fire, but that God would hear 
us when we pray to Him, and if we trust Him fully 
He would save. On and on he preached in this 
strain as long as any would stop to listen, and after- 
wards he said it was one of the strangest things to 
him that, when able to read the Bible for himself, he 
found it tallied exactly with many things he said in 
those old days, thus showing that the Spirit in the 
Word and the Spirit in the heart is one. His old 
relative was delighted, and soon after the preachers 
and other Christians, who heard of his changed life 
and earnestness, sought to teach him more clearly 
about the things of God. It was not long ere all the 
Christians in his village suffered severe persecution, 
but though he had never heard that the Scriptures 
exhorted to endure persecution joyfully, still he and 
all did indeed rejoice to suffer for Christ, and in the 
midst of the fire sang hymns, prayed, and praised 
that they were counted worthy to suffer for His dear 
name's sake. In after days he often expressed the 
wish that he had now the same deep earnestness and 
longing to lead others to the light which he had in 



" THE GOSPEL OF PEACE " 137 

the beginning of his Christian life. Wherever he 
went walking on the roads, in boats, inns, or in 
houses he told the story. To him it was so 
wonderful, he thought he had only to tell others 
and they too would believe. 

Later on, Mr. Stott, hearing what a promising 
young preacher he seemed to be, invited him to 
the Mission House in Wenchow, to study. He 
made very rapid progress both in his Christian life 
and studies. Since then he has been an earnest 
and true Bible student. For a few years he con- 
tinued at his trade, but at the same time doing all 
in his power to help forward the work, and took 
regular services in his native village. 

In course of time he married one of our Christian 
schoolgirls, who has been a true helpmeet to him, 
helping in the work amongst women and children, 
besides keeping her home in such cleanly comfort 
as is seldom seen in China. 

In 1887, when the out-stations of Bing-yie and 
Dong-ling were given over to two young missionaries 
to be henceforth worked as separate stations, Mr. 
Stott handed over to them Mr. Dzang and Mr. Tsie 
as two of our most efficient helpers. For years he did 
valuable work there, until about four years ago, when 
he came to help me at Wenchow. He has been my 
right hand and greatest comfort since, for though 
others have done good and valuable work, he, by 



138 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

his deeply spiritual character and knowledge of the 
Word of God, has been a most valued teacher, as 
well as pastor of our large Wenchow church. 

Sa-loe-sz-mo, our Bible-woman, has a bright round 
face which beams upon you at all times. I have 
often wondered, in looking into that face, whether 
her sad life's history, which she had often told, could 
indeed be true. Not only has the past been full of 
sadness, but even now there is nothing in her home 
surroundings which can account for her cheery, happy 
smile. Truly God has given her His own peace and 
joy, which the world can neither give nor take away. 
She was only a little child when she was betrothed 
to a man twenty years her senior, and taken to her 
future husband's home to be henceforth completely 
under the rule of her mother-in-law, who seems to 
have been a hard, unkind woman. The child was 
both hot-headed and warm-hearted. A little love 
would have brought out her better qualities, but with 
hard words and harder treatment she grew reckless 
and disobedient, ever ready to answer back if found 
fault with. Of course this only made her mother-in- 
law more unkind and bitter. It was most pathetic 
to hear our little woman tell of how desperate she 
used to get, and how, after being scolded and beaten, 
she longed to put an end to her miserable existence. 
Sometimes she even went so far as to try to 



"THE GOSPEL OF PEACE" 139' 

strangle herself ; but, feeling the choking sensation, 
would get frightened and let herself go in time. 
How wonderful was God's goodness in restraining 
her. She little knew then that she was His chosen 
vessel to bring cheer, gladness, and life to many a 
heart as sad as her own ; for, alas ! hers was no 
uncommon case only a specimen of the many, 
many little daughters-in-law living a life of slavery, 
receiving as reward scoldings and blows. 

About ten years ago, not very long after her mar- 
riage, a young neighbour woman became interested 
in the gospel. Soon this woman was converted 
and became earnest in telling, others the good news. 
After her conversion she was visited by Christians 
and preachers, who were ever glad of an opening to 
tell of Christ's love to those neighbours whom she 
had gathered and whom she was anxious to interest 
in her new-found treasure. After the first curiosity 
was appeased very few cared to listen, and only into 
one heart prepared by the Holy Spirit did the seed 
seem to fall and take root, and that heart was 
Sa-loe-sz-mo's. Impelled by some, as yet, unknown 
power, she would go whenever possible, either to hear 
her neighbour's visitors, or to talk over the strange 
new things with her friend privately. As soon as 
her husband and mother-in-law found she was truly 
interested in what they called the " foreign doctrine " 
they tried to prevent her going out, complained of 



i 4 o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

her wasting time, and forbade her to listen any 
more. Her only chance, then, was to steal out in 
the evening, when her day's work was done, to her 
friend's house, and there talk quietly, ask questions, 
and learn to pray. For many months things went 
on thus, but as she became more and more interested 
she longed for more spiritual food and begged to be 
allowed to go to the chapel on Sundays. The very 
mention of this desire brought down upon her a 
storm of petty persecution ; but by that time she 
was slowly learning to restrain her tongue, and 
instead of answering back, as formerly, would retire 
to pray and to ask the Lord to open up a way for 
her. She tried very hard every day to be specially 
good towards her ill-tempered mother-in-law and 
to do more than her usual amount of silk spinning. 
By Saturday evening she had succeeded so well, 
that when she asked, with fear and trembling, to be 
allowed to go to chapel next day, she was surprised 
by a favourable reply ; and thus, by dint of great 
effort and industry, the little woman used to get 
permission to accompany her friend to the Sunday 
services, and it was not long before she was truly 
converted. After that she had to endure bitter per- 
secution. Her husband often beat and ill-used her 
for believing " the doctrine," but her manifest change 
of behaviour, her industry, patience, and brightness 
at last conquered the prejudices of both mother and 



"THE GOSPEL OF PEACE" 141 

husband. Not long ago, when some of the neigh- 
bours laughed at him for his weakness in allowing 
his wife to leave the worship of their forefathers, he 
answered, "A religion that is able to change and 
make her a much better wife must be good, and I 
shall not be the one to hinder." The mother-in-law 
is now dead, and the husband, though unconverted, 
allows her to do as she pleases. She has been an 
earnest, active Bible-woman for four years, and has 
been the means of leading many of her dark sisters 
into the light of God's love. She has unbound her 
feet which means a good deal to a Chinese woman 
so that she may be better fitted for country work, 
as she has often to walk ten or fifteen miles in the 
day. Often when we have been out together I have 
retired quite worn out with the day's labours, while 
she, who had done so much or more than I, would 
continue till midnight teaching the Christians and 
inquirers. 

During the two hottest months, when it is im- 
possible to go out much, she refuses her salary, 
preferring to support herself by tea-picking, silk- 
weaving, or otherwise. She is only thirty years of 
age, and thus rather young, according to Chinese 
etiquette, to go about alone, and when not accom- 
panied by myself or one of the young ladies, I 
always send an elderly woman with her ; but her 
conduct is so wise and discreet that no one has ever 



142 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

hinted that her youth was any barrier to her useful- 
ness. Her cheery helpfulness makes her a favourite 
with the women, while her sturdy independence calls 
forth the respect of all. Her words carry conviction, 
so that even rough country men are compelled to 
listen to her quietly and respectfully. Her loving 
sympathy opens up the hearts of the people, and 
prepares the way for any straightforward words she 
may have to say about things which are not right 
in the lives of any of the Christians. She is not 
afraid to speak out, though doing it in such a manner 
as rarely produces any bad feeling. We look upon 
her as a God-sent gift to the Church. 

One of our most devoted and intelligent women is 
Ling-di-na, who had formerly been a great opium- 
smoker ; she was now a widow, but she had begun 
that pernicious habit while her husband was alive, he 
too being a victim of the drug. She was a silk- 
weaver, and the constant sitting over her work, 
together with poor food, brought on a painful internal 
trouble, for which she sought relief in opium, and 
thus the habit was formed. Soon work, home duties, 
and everything good and true was given up, and she 
lived only to smoke and enjoy the soothing after- 
effects ; as she herself said, " all pride and self-respect 
were lost." The confirmed opium-smoker will not 
work if he can get the drug without, and, when 
reduced to poverty, will pawn or sell everything he 



" THE GOSPEL OF PEACE " 143 

possesses, even wife, child all must go to procure 
that which has become to him more than life. By 
and by her husband died, and some time later a 
friend, by no means a bright Christian, persuaded her 
to accompany her to hear the gospel. She attended 
regularly, when one day her only son was taken ill 
and died. In her grief she refused to be comforted, 
and would not go near the chapel. The Christians, 
however, did not forsake her ; they held a little 
service over the child, and tried to persuade her 
to stay in our compound and break off the opium. 
She half promised, and that night knelt down to 
pray for the first time. She told God what they 
wanted her to do, but that now her baby was gone 
she did not care what became of her ; if only she 
could see her child again she would be comforted. 
They had told her it was in heaven with Jesus, and 
that, if she believed, she would go there and see it 
by and by. If that were true, and the Lord would 
give her some evidence that her child was indeed 
living, she would go next day to get the opium 
medicine and become a true "Jesus disciple." She 
went to bed, and that night was granted to her a 
wonderful vision : the room was flooded with light, 
and scene after scene was presented to her. I cannot 
recall all she said, but in one scene she saw our two 
young ladies dressed in white. " Ah, they are in 
heaven," she thought; "but my baby is not there." 



144 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Again she saw a beautiful boy : " That must be the 
Lord Jesus when at twelve years of age he was lost 
in Jerusalem." Then she saw a beautiful golden city, 
so bright and glorious that she knew at once it must 
be heaven ; but still her child was nowhere to be 
seen. At last she recognised him sitting on the 
golden pavement, as he had often sat on her mud 
floor, and her heart bounded with a great joy : " Yes, 
he surely was there, and she would believe, so that 
by and by she might meet him again." 

The next morning saw her early at the C.I.M. 
premises, asking medicine to break off the degrading 
habit, though she knew it meant much suffering. 
This was eight years ago, and her Christian life has 
been without a shadow. When we were without a 
doctor, and Miss Bardsley was doing what she could 
to relieve some of the suffering around, this dear 
woman voluntarily gave up two mornings a week to 
preach to the women who came for treatment. In 
this and other ways she has been ever willing to do 
what she could for the spread of the gospel. She is 
well fitted for the work of Bible-woman, but physical 
weakness prevents her doing much country work, 
though she is always willing to accompany one or 
other of our young ladies when visiting nearer 
places. 



CHAPTER XI 

" When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee ; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee." ISA. xliii. 2. 

IN 1886 we were joined by three new workers, Miss 
Oliver, who arrived in May, Mr. Grierson in 
June, and Mr. Sayers in July. My husband and I 
had both felt that the work had grown too heavy for 
our shoulders ; I wanted some one to relieve me of 
the girls' school, and he wanted young men to do 
more of the country work. In the autumn of that 
year, Mr. Stott handed over the two churches of 
Dong-ling and Bing-yie to the charge of the two 
young brethren ; they were to live at Bing-yie and 
work in the surrounding districts, so what was an 
out-station before, became a new centre, from which 
stations were opened, these ever since having been a 
separate work. Mr. Sayers, after a few months, left 
for Chii-chow, where he was privileged to labour only 
a few months, for he was "called home" in the 
autumn of 1888. Mr. G. still continues in the 

n 145 



146 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

charge of the Bing-yie work. In 1887 we felt it 
necessary to take a change to England, Mr. Stott 
being considerably run down in health ; Miss Oliver, 
who had taken charge of the girls' school, was then 
engaged to Mr. G., in whose care the Wenchow 
church was left during our absence. They were 
married in 1888, and on my return went back to 
their own work at Bing-yie. 

Mr. Stott's health began to fail almost as soon as 
we left China, and by the time we reached England 
he was very ill ; congestion of the lungs, combined 
with weak action of the heart, caused such difficulty 
of breathing that to lie down was impossible. Night 
and day he sat in patient suffering for a year and 
eight months, although for most of that time he was 
able to go about and enjoy nature in all her lovely 
forms. After three months spent with dear friends 
in London we went to Dartmouth, and remained the 
winter and spring of 1887 and 1888 with the Misses 
Teage ; there he was surrounded with every comfort 
that love and kindness could devise. He had a 
donkey-carriage and drove himself for miles round 
the lovely country, while I walked and talked by his 
side. That winter was a memory he loved to dwell 
upon, the dear friends making a deep impression 
upon his heart. 

Being in Scotland in the summer of 1888, we 
were invited to join Drs. Gordon and Pierson in a 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WA TERS " 147 

missionary tour, and as an eminent physician en- 
couraged us with his opinion that frequent change 
of scene would benefit the dear invalid, we accom- 
panied them. We had most remarkable blessing 
during the six weeks in which we visited all the 
principal cities and towns in the north ; large 
numbers, attracted by the eloquence of Drs. Gordon 
and Pierson, left deeply impressed by the wonderful 
story of what God had done among the heathen. 
Mrs. Gordon and I conducted ladies' meetings in eack 
place, I frequently speaking in the evening meetings 
as well ; but while it was my privilege to engage in 
this more public work in my husband's stead, helped 
by his encouragement, sympathy, and prayers, he was 
doing a no less blessed work, for, though unable to 
attend any of the meetings, the holy, sweet influence 
of his life was telling most powerfully on those 
around him. Everywhere our kind entertainers were 
deeply impressed with his not only patient but cheer- 
ful suffering, and many were won by him then who 
have been my warm friends ever since. 

At the end of this tour the doctor said Mr. Stott 
was decidedly better, and if he would spend the 
winter in the south of France he might yet recover. 
So in November we left for Cannes, where we spent 
several months in a bright sunny home for invalids ; 
but, in spite of care and doctors' skill, the disease 
gained upon him until, on April 21, 1889, Easter 



148 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Sunday, he most triumphantly entered into the 
presence of his Lord. 

As he was evidently, though slowly, growing 
weaker, I asked the doctor if the place were suitable, 
or if a change of climate would be of any use. He 
answered he would like a consultation before giving 
me an answer, for if it was as he feared no change 
would be of any use. After the consultation, my 
husband, looking the doctor full in the face, said, 
" Do you think I shall be able to return to China ? " 
The doctor, not wishing to tell the sad truth, turned 
the question aside. Mr. Stott, seeing the evasion, 
said, " Don't be afraid to tell me the worst, for there 
is no worst for me, thank God. I have had twenty 
years' service for Him in China ; I did wish to go 
back, but if He says no, why should I desire it? I 
am willing to stay and suffer if it is His will ; 
willing to go to China if it be His will." And 
then with a bright smile he added, " Why, I believe 
I am willing to go half-way to China and then go to 
heaven, if that were His will." The doctor looked 
at him earnestly and said, " I envy you." He then 
told him plainly there was no hope of recovery. Not 
a shadow crossed the face ; he knew where his home 
was and longed to go. I was not unprepared ; I saw 
the daily weakening of the poor body and feared 
there could be no return of strength ; but it was 
more difficult for me to submit to God's will. To 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WA TERS " 149 

him God's will had ever been first, and he had no 
hard lesson to learn. 

I remember a lady, who was strongly impressed 
with faith-healing views, talking with him during his 
first few months of illness. She said it was only a 
matter of faith ; he might be better if he would ; it 
was so easy just to have faith in God, and it would 
be done. She asked, "Don't you think God could 
heal you and send you back to your loved work ? " 
He replied, " My difficulty does not lie there ; I know 
Pie could ; but God once gave the desire of the heart 
and sent leanness to the soul. I do not want that. 
He knows if He gave me strength it will be used for 
His service, and if weakness, it will be borne for Him. 
I want Him to have His own way with me all through." 
The lady had nothing to answer ; I think she must 
have felt as I did, that it was better to lie passively 
in God's hands than to refuse to suffer. 

But I did not learn the lesson so quickly ; for a 
long time I wrestled and struggled for his life. For 
a while I hid from him my distress ; but one night, 
unable to bear any longer, I sobbed out that I could 
not let him go. Calmly and quietly he said, " Not 
yet, dearie, not yet ; God will make you willing when 
the time comes." Three days after, God caused me 
to triumph in Christ, my will was swallowed up in 
His will, and all was peace. That evening, kneeling 
by his side, I was for the first time able to ask God 



150 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

to take him home, gently, quietly, and painlessly, and 
to take him soon. While I was praying he gave a 
sigh of relief and said, " Thank God." When I had 
finished praying he said, " You don't know how much 
good these words have done me ; I knew God would 
bring you to that point before He called me away. 
I was only waiting to hear you say such words as 
these ; I have nothing more to desire all is 
well." 

For six weeks after this we lived together on the 
borderland ; not for one moment did I ever wish to keep 
him back. We talked and prayed much, and almost 
went into heaven together ; we made my plans for the 
future, even to the month in which I should start for 
China ; all had been talked over, and I was able to 
carry out the arrangements made by him even to the 
letter. It was a great joy to him to know that I was 
going back to take up his work, and to be both father 
and mother to the people he loved so dearly, for we 
had been as one in the work. When I asked if he 
had any instructions for me, he said, " No, you know 
the people and work as well as I, and will do just as 
I have done I have no care about that ; only give 
the native Christians my love, and tell them I would 
have returned to them if I could, but I shall wait for 
them, and by and by we shall meet." 

The very wonderful way in which he realised the 
Lord's presence is related in a small pamphlet 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WATERS" 151 

entitled, " In Memoriam : George Stott," published 
by Morgan and Scott. From this I quote the fol- 
lowing letters, written to our C.I.M. secretary : 

" MAISON BLANCHE, 
"ROUTE DE GRASSE, CANNES, 

"April 23, 1889. 

"DEAR MR. BROOMHALL, It was my privilege 
to be with our dear departed brother, Mr. Stott, 
during his last night on earth, and a few particulars 
of the closing scene will, I know, be acceptable to 
you. Slowly, during many weeks of pain, the earthly 
house of this tabernacle was being dissolved, and on 
Saturday evening, about 9.30, one of the sisters came 
over to say that his sufferings had become more 
intense, and the end seemed approaching. I was in 
the act of reading in the Christian classics, 'De 
Incarnation Verbi Dei/ the account by Athanasius 
of the triumphs of the early Christians and martyrs 
over death, due to their Lord and Master, who, by 
His Cross and Resurrection had vanquished death, so 
that they no longer feared but despised it. ( For,' 
says he, * as when the sun rises after the night has 
passed, and the whole globe is illuminated by it, it is 
not at all doubtful that it is the sun which has shed 
its light everywhere, and has driven away the dark- 
ness and enlightened all things ; so death being 
utterly despised and trampled down from the time 



152 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

when the Saviour's saving appearance in the body, 
and end upon the Cross took place, it is perfectly 
clear that it is the Saviour Himself, who appeared in 
the body, who brought death to naught, and daily 
exhibits trophies against it in His own disciples. 
For when one sees men, who are by nature weak, 
leaping forth to death and not cowering before its 
corruption, nor displaying fear at the descent into 
Hades, but with zealous soul provoking it ; and not 
shrinking from tortures, but for Christ's sake pre- 
ferring rather than this present life to rush upon 
death ; or, too, if one be a beholder of men and 
women and young children rushing upon and leaping 
forth to death for the religion of Christ ; who is so 
simple, or who is so unbelieving, or is so incapaci- 
tated in mind, as not to perceive and draw the con- 
clusion that Christ, to whom the men bear witness, 
Himself bestows and gives to each the victory over 
death, rendering it utterly weak in each of those who 
hold His faith and bear the sign of the Cross ? ' It 
was thus, I thought, sixteen hundred years ago, but 
how many times, in common with all Christian 
workers in this land, I have heard the popular 
dictum, Le Christianisme a fait son temps, * Chris- 
tianity has had its day/ * It is used out ' ? And as I 
went forth to witness for the first time a death-bed 
scene, this thought was uppermost, * Will it ratify the 
affirmation of Athanasius, and show that after six- 



" WHEN THOUPASSEST THROUGH THE WATERS" 153 

teen centuries the virtue of the Cross and Resurrec- 
tion is in no degree diminished ?' 

"Entering the chamber, I saw our dear brother 
sitting up in the armchair, supported by his dear 
wife and one of the nursing sisters. It was one of 
the distressing features of his illness that he was 
unable to lie down, and all these weary weeks of 
pain had been passed sitting, with no possibility of 
supporting the poor head or giving the body relief, 
only by occasionally leaning forward. The strong 
man was bowed, and poor nature was in a pitiable 
plight. The props of the tent were being taken 
away, and the suppressed groans of the sufferer told 
of the silver cord being loosed, and the links being 
broken which bound the spirit to the earthly tene- 
ment. 

"When he knew I was present he expressed a 
decided wish that I should stay with him, which I 
was only too glad to do ; and as I look back on that 
night, I feel that not for any consideration would I 
have missed that scene of suffering and holy triumph. 
Never before did I know how truly death is a van- 
quished enemy, its empire overthrown and its sceptre 
destroyed. During eight hours we witnessed the 
King of Terrors doing his worst. The combat was 
a fierce one, blow after blow was dealt, strong pains 
were tearing at the vitals ; the anguish of dissolution 
was there, but not for one moment did the spirit 



154 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

falter. With every moment's respite from pain he 
collected his little strength to give forth some word 
of testimony that the Lord was near, and doubt and 
fear far away. ' It is only the poor body that is 
suffering/ he said ; ' the soul is happy.' Early in 
the evening he said, ' I bless God that thirty years 
ago He washed me from my sins in His precious 
blood, and now the sun is shining without a cloud ' ; 
and thus with unfaltering faith, and with unwavering 
hope, he went down into the valley of the shadow. 

" Before leaving my house it came to my mind to 
glance at the portion for the evening in ' Daily 
Light,' and there indeed was a highway 'cast up.' 
Beautiful and appropriate it was, beginning with 
the words, * It is I ; be not afraid. When thou 
passeth through the waters I will be with thee ; and 
through the rivers they shall not overflow thee ; when 
thou walkest through the fire thou shalt not be 
burned ; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee : 
for I am the Lord thy God, thy Saviour. Though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death I 
will fear no evil : for Thou art with me ; Thy rod and 
Thy staff they comfort me. Who shall separate us 
from the love of Christ ? Shall tribulation, or distress, 
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or 
sword ? ' I took it with me, that dear Mr. Stott 
might have a word like apples of gold in pictures of 
silver. In this { royal road ' we saw him advance, 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WA TERS " 155 

treading down with triumphant faith the powers of 
sin, and death, and hell. 

"The words he repeated the most were, 'Come 
Lord Jesus, come now, come now/ often reaching 
out his arms to welcome the Lord, whom he felt was 
indeed drawing near. Once or twice, in moments of 
extreme pain, his cry went up, 'O Lord, help me; Lord, 
have mercy upon me.' The Lord heard him in the 
day of his distress, and strengthened him in the dire 
conflict. We sought to supply stones for his steps, 
as he forded the dark stream ; words of life came 
spontaneously to our lips, and it was grand to see 
how his faith appropriated them. When his dear 
wife reminded him that he would soon hear the 
Master's ' Well done, good and faithful servant, enter 
thou into the joy of thy Lord,' his soul seemed to 
revel in the thought. ' Enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord, of thy Lord/ he repeated again and again ; 
then turning it into a prayer, and stretching out his 
hands, he said, ' Let me enter now, enter now, into 
the joy of my Lord, the joy of my Lord.' 

" He had feared lest in his weakness and suffering 
some impatient word should escape him, and he 
should thus dishonour his Lord : he had begged his 
dear wife to put it down to nature's weakness ; but 
her prediction was verified, the Lord's grace was all 
sufficient ; no murmuring or impatient word passed 
his lips ; while his deep gratitude and affection for 



156 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

the smallest service rendered him were touching and 
beautiful to see, and every one felt it a privilege to 
wait upon him. 

"And thus the hours passed, he fighting the last 
battle ; his dear wife, worn with many watchings, 
wearied out physically but wonderfully supported in 
spirit, with words of faith and hope cheering him 
as he breasted the billows, and watching for his 
release. 

"Prayers from many loving hearts in England, 
China, and France, were being answered that night. 
There could be no doubt about it. And the word 
the memory of that scene calls up spontaneously to 
my mind is * Mahanaim,' for that chamber of death 
was then the rendezvous of the hosts of God. 

"It was six in the morning ; nature outside was 
awaking in the first fresh joy of morning light. 
The sun had risen in a sky of cloudless blue. The 
birds were singing their morning song just outside 
the slightly opened window, while the carillon of the 
Easter bells came sounding joyously through the air 
Within we were standing on the borderland, close by 
the gates which were opening to another who, having 
fought the good fight through Christ, was more than 
conqueror. The change had come, the contracted 
features and glazing eye told that the last struggle 
was entered on. A hurried ' He is going ' escaped 
us. I did not expect to hear him speak again, and, 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WA TERS " 157 

as consciousness seemed fading, I said, ' The Master 
is come, and calleth for thee.' He took it in, and to 
my surprise, with a last effort, said, * Then lift me 
up, that I may give another note of praise/ Putting 
my arms around him, I drew him gently forward. 
Then as fast as his poor breath came he turned it 
into praise. ' Praise the Lord, bless His holy name/ 
he repeated again and again. 

" It was wonderful to listen to, and I could not help 
saying to the dear companion of his life and labours, 
who on her knees, with only half-suppressed cries 
from the pangs which were rending her own heart, 
was holding his hands and watching the shadows of 
death as they passed over his face, ' This is a pre- 
cious legacy he is leaving you.' They were like words 
of triumph coming out of the very realms of death. 
1 Do you know me, precious one ? ' she asked. 
' Know you, Gracie ? it would be strange if I didn't 
know you,' was the reply. Then with a strength 
that surprised me, he added, 'We have rallied to- 
gether around that dish of fruit' one of their last 
conversations had been about the fruit of the Tree of 
Life * many a time, and the King in His beauty was 
there. Farewell, Gracie ; don't speak to me again, I 
am going to see the King.' 

" Those were hallowed moments. Sceur Achard, the 
directress, and another of the sisters had joined us. 
Most tenderly and faithfully had they done 'what 



158 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

they could' for him. M. Louis, the manservant, 
was helping me to support him; while before him, 
kneeling, was she from whom the desire of her eyes 
was being taken. Our tears were flowing fast, though 
we hardly knew why. He was looking on things 
which to us were invisible, and hearing sounds our 
dull ears could not catch. We could hear him say in 
a low whisper, 'Come, Lord Jesus Lord, take my 
spirit;' then he said, 'Coming, coming come, come.' 
With these last words our beloved brother, George 
Stott, went in to see the King in His beauty, on 
Easter morning, at half-past six. 

"Nature's pent-up grief broke forth in brief cries and 
sobs, but they were happy tears. ' I don't mourn for 
him,' said his dear wife, ' I mourn for myself. He is 
happy he is at rest now.' 

"And so we knelt together to praise Him who had 
given us that night to see that death has no sting, and 
the grave no victory. 'As then,' says Athanasius, 'it 
is possible to see with the eyes that these things are 
true, so when death is mocked and despised by the 
believers in Christ, let him no longer doubt, let no one 
be wanting in faith that by Christ death was brought 
to naught and its corruption destroyed and put an 
end to.' Having seen with our eyes, we set the seal 
of truth to this testimony. 

" We buried him yesterday in the Cannes cemetery. 
The Rev. P. W. Minto conducted the service. A 



" WHEN THOU PASSEST THROUGH THE WA TERS " 159 

number of Christian friends were present. All who 
knew him loved him as a true man of God, and a 
faithful servant of Christ. Among those present was 
Mr. W. T. Berger, his lifelong friend, from whose 
house, twenty-four years ago, he had started for the 
scene of his life's labour in distant China. In a few 
brief but beautifully appropriate words, Mr. Berger 
spoke of the zeal and love which had animated him in 
his work for Christ. He addressed words of loving 
sympathy and consolation to the widow, and reminded 
us all, for each of us the day was hastening to its 
close, and that we should work ere the night cometh. 
Then we laid him to rest, singing over his grave the 
Christian's 'Good Night': 

* Sleep on, beloved, sleep and take thy rest ; 
Lay down thy head upon thy Saviour's breast ; 
We love thee well, but Jesus loves thee best. 

Good-night ! Good-night ! Good-night ! 

Until the Easter glory lights the skies, 
Until the dead in Jesus Christ arise, 
And He shall come, but not in lowly guise. 
Good-night ! ' 

There we left the body, sleeping in joyful hope of the 
resurrection, * till the day dawn and the shadows flee 
away.' 

" I remain, dear Mr. Broomhall, with Christian love, 
"Yours sincerely, 

" H. WEBBER." 



CHAPTER XII 

"The memory of the just is blessed." PROV. x. 7. 

A NOTHER testimony must be given, for it comes 
-*^ from one whose kindness ought to be mentioned 
as an example for the imitation of others. 

" DEAR MR. BROOMHALL My acquaintance with 
our dear departed friend, Mr. Stott, began in, I think, 
the year 1868. My brother-in-law had convened at 
his house a meeting of friends who were interested 
in foreign missionary work. There was a good 
attendance, and it was agreed that each one present 
should put themselves in communication with some 
labourer in the foreign field, and that later on another 
meeting should be held, when replies received should 
be read. I cannot help thinking such a plan, if more 
often adopted, would be the means not only of bring- 
ing refreshment to our fellow-labourers in the regions 
beyond, but would also enable those at home more 



160 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST 7S BLESSED" 161 

definitely and intelligently to remember them at the 
throne of grace. 

" I was unable to attend the meeting to which I 
refer, until just at the close, when I found that the 
name of Mr. George Stott, of Wenchow, whom I had 
never seen and whose name in connection with the 
newly formed C.I.M. I barely knew, was allotted to me. 
I at once wrote, and was very gratified in due course 
to receive an appreciative reply. I regret a second 
meeting was never held and, so far as I know, none 
present at the first continued their correspondence. 
But Mr. Stott and I regularly wrote to each other for 
nine years, when it was my privilege personally to 
become acquainted with him and Mrs. Stott on their 
visit to England. The correspondence continued 
without interruption ever after, and it was a great 
pleasure to receive them into our home, although he 
was in such a weak state when they arrived from 
China, via U.S.A., eighteen months ago. 

"I cannot tell you the blessing this long friendship has 
been to me ; and the pleasure of the service, which many 
might easily undertake and maintain, is one I would 
willingly commend to others. The insight which dear 
Mr. Stott's letters have given me into his patient self- 
denying labours (which by God's blessing have been 
attended with so much success) have taught me many 
lessons which I trust never to forget, and my earnest 
desire for myself and all who have known and loved 

12 



1 62 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

him, is that we may by grace be enabled to follow him 
as he followed Christ (i Cor. xi. i). Our sorrow is not 
without hope, and the thought of our own loss is out- 
weighed by the contemplation of his great gain, who 
has now been called to enter into the joy of his Lord. 
" Believe me, my dear Mr. Broomhall, 
"Yours faithfully, 

"JOHN F. ALLEN." 

Mr. Broomhall adds : " It is not a little remarkable 
that one who had to do with Mr. Stott's going out to 
China in 1865, who had been his faithful friend and 
correspondent all through his missionary life, should 
be residing at the place of his death and have the 
opportunity at his graveside to bear testimony, such 
as from fulness of knowledge but few others could 
bear, to the faithful service of his life ; but this was 
Mr. Berger's privilege, and that which was the peculiar 
privilege of the living was the special and deserved 
honour of our departed brother." 

Mr. Berger wrote as follows : 

" VILLA TALBOT, CANNES, 

"April 23, 1889. 

" DEAR MR, BROOMHALL, Who can estimate the 
issue of a single grain of wheat falling into the ground 
and dying? Many lives will surely spring up therefrom 
and in consequence thereof. It has pleased God to 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 163 

take to Himself His faithful servant, George Stott, 
late of Wenchow, China, than whom it would be 
difficult to find one more devoted and steadfast in 
prosecuting the work he believed the Lord had given 
him to do. We committed his remains to the tomb 
yesterday afternoon, to await the voice of the Son of 
God calling those who shall hear it (His sleeping 
saints) to come forth from their graves, that they with 
the changed living ones may together ascend to meet 
and be with the Lord for ever. 

" We have reason to believe that Mr. Stott's twenty- 
three years' labour in China has been greatly owned 
and blessed, he having left in existence in Wenchow 
and its neighbourhood (where, if I mistake not, no 
foreign missionary had previously laboured) three 
native churches, numbering in all about three hundred 
members besides as many attendants, to say nothing 
of the schools he inaugurated. You will pardon my 
entering thus into details, when I tell you that I made 
Mr. Stott's acquaintance prior to his going to China 
in the year 1865, he being one of the five who went out 
when the China Inland Mission was but in its incipient 
state. His works do follow him. In thus writing, we 
do not glory in George Stott, but in the Lord, who 
wrought the works by His servant, 

" Of his devoted wife I must abstain from writing, 
but ask that much prayer may ascend to God on her 
behalf. Her heart seems set on returning to China to 



164 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

carry on the work she left as far as it may be in her 
power to do so. After twenty-three years' correspon- 
dence with Mr. and Mrs. Stott, I look back with 
the most pleasing remembrance of the same, and 
rejoice if in any measure I can be considered as 
having had partnership in their labours. 
" I remain, dear Mr. Broomhall, 

" Faithfully yours, 

"W. T. BERGER." 

A lady who had spent the winter at the Asile, and 
had thus become acquainted with Mr. Stott, now 
herself in the presence of the King, wrote : 

"ASILE EVANGELIQUE, 
" ROUTE DE GRASSE, CANNES, 

u April 25, 1889. 

"DEAR SIR, As one who had the privilege of 
spending this winter with Mr. Stott at the Asile, I feel 
I should like to send a few lines to tell you how bright 
a memory he has left behind with us of faith and 
patience and cheerful acquiescence in God's will ; in- 
deed, that will was evidently his delight, whether it 
meant doing or suffering. When speaking about 
plans for the future soon after he came, he said ' if it 
were the Lord's will he would like either China or 
heaven/ 

We were struck with the way in which he entered 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 165 

into and enjoyed everything, notwithstanding his 
weary nights, always spent sitting up in his chair ; 
and his graphic descriptions of his life and work in 
China (work so dear to him) were an unfailing source 
of interest. He was quite the life of our little party 
here, until extreme weakness and suffering made 
speaking too great a fatigue. 

" I was prevented by illness from intercourse with 
him for some little time, and when able to see him 
again found a great change for the worse had taken 
place. Dropsy had then set in, and, after a consulta- 
tion, the doctors gave no prospect of recovery or of 
his being able to return to China. He took this 
decision calmly and cheerfully, comforting his dear 
wife with ' Never mind, dear ; nothing can really hurt 
us, you know.' One day, when I spoke of the dis- 
comfort his swollen leg must cause him, he said, ' Oh, 
it is all quite right, my mind is kept continually in 
peace night and day, and as far as I know myself, I 
can say I am ready at any moment the Lord shall 
call me.' 

" Several weeks of great suffering and weakness 
followed, borne with such Christian courage and 
patience as we can never forget. Sick people in the 
house were enabled to bear their burdens more cheer- 
fully on hearing of him and servants and all who had 
to do with him, spoke of the wonderful way in which 
he bore his illness. There was not an approach to a 



166 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

murmur in his most painful moments, and always a 
word of welcome to those who entered his room. His 
gratitude for the least service or attention was very 
touching. He was loved by all. 

" The Friday before his death, I went in to see him 
for a few minutes. He said, * I am getting very near 
the kingdom now;' and then as I took leave of him, 
'God bless you; perhaps the next time we meet will 
be in glory.' The following evening we knew that 
the last struggle had begun; but even during that 
Saturday night he was full of praise to God, and was 
able to rise in a remarkable way above the bodily 
distress. * It is only the poor body that suffers/ he 
said, to those who were watching, * my mind is full of 
peace and joy.' 

"Almost his last breath was spent in praising God. 
He asked to be raised up a little in his chair, saying, 
'I want to sound one more note of praise,' and then 
began, ' Bless the Lord, O my soul,' and shortly after- 
wards he said, ' Coming, coming, come,' and fell asleep 
in Jesus. 

"It seemed, that Sunday morning, as if the gates of 
the heavenly city had been thrown open so wide to 
receive him, that we, too, had a foretaste of its peace 
and joy. We sorrow with dear Mrs. Stott in her great 
loss, and pray that the Lord may be very near her in 
her loneliness, and that He will strengthen her to 
carry on the work for Him in China, which she loves 



THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 167 

so well, for the ' little while ' until they meet again in 
His presence. For us, amongst whom they have been 
this winter, their sojourn will be a precious remem- 
brance of God's power to sustain, strengthen, and 
cheer in the time of trial. 

<: Believe me, dear sir, 

"Yours sincerely, 

" ELEANOR H. MOOR." 

Miss E. R. Teage writes : 

" It is so blessed to think of our dear friend at rest. 
What a ' resurrection morning ' it must have been for 
him ! but one feels a great blank left. He endeared 
himself to all who knew him by his patient, bright 
spirit. You will, I know, feel much the loss of dear 
Mr. Stott from your Mission ; he was such a faithful 
and earnest worker, and has been one with you from 
the earliest days of the Mission. We feel so thankful 
to the Lord for giving us the honour of having him 
under our roof. He was such an example of real, 
childlike faith, and so happy. . . . We desire to add 
our testimony to that of many others in bearing 
witness to the blessed influence he had over those 
among whom he stayed during the past eighteen 
months, since his return to England. Days and nights 
of weariness and suffering were appointed to him, and 
although for nearly two years he had been unable, 



i68 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

owing to the difficulty of breathing, to lie down and 
take a night's rest, yet his bright spirit and childlike 
confidence in all the will of God concerning him 
seemed never to have been clouded for a moment. 

" His heart's desire was to return to the people 
among whom he laboured for more than twenty 
years, and greatly will he be missed by those dear 
native Christians, to so many of whom he was made 
the honoured instrument in leading them to the 
Saviour. He has now been called to ' rest from his 
labours,' but we may truly say, * his works do follow 
him ' ; for the little church in the far-off heathen 
land, which through God's blessing is the result of 
years of patient toil and tested faith, stands as a 
living witness to the grace and love of God in using 
' a poor weak instrument ' (as he himself would often 
say) to His glory. 

" It was at about the age of eighteen that, owing to 
an accident, he was obliged to undergo the amputa- 
tion of one leg, and soon after this time of affliction 
he was led to rejoice in Jesus as his Saviour. He 
then gave himself to the Lord for service, and was 
one of the first who went out with the China Inland 
Mission, to live among the people for whom he has 
since laboured so earnestly. His testimony to the 
end has been very bright ; for, though suffering and 
extreme weakness have increased day by day, his 
spirit has been rejoicing in his Saviour, and his soul 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 169 

full of trust. * Faint, yet pursuing ' was the message 
he sent not many days since to some friends, and 
again, only four days ago, he said : ' I cannot speak, 
cannot sing, cannot pray, can hardly think, but Jesus 
is my all in all.' And now the race is run, and he 
has heard the welcome call, 'Enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord.' In closing, we would add a verse 
of one of his favourite hymns as being so appropriate 
to his last moments : 

" For me be it Christ, be it Christ hence to live. 

If Jordan above me shall roll, 
No pang shall be mine, for in death, as in life, 
Thou wilt whisper Thy peace to my soul. 
' It is well, it is well, with my soul.' " 

I also append two letters written by his former 
school-boys, which show more than any words of 
mine how much he was loved and honoured. 

Translation of a Letter written by Tsiu-die-ctiing 

" Our pastor, Mr. Stott, came to Wenchow twenty- 
four years ago to preach the gospel of Christ. At 
that time the good news had not yet been heard in 
Wenchow, the Light of God had not then shone upon 
the people. No one knew where they came from, 
nor where they would go to after death ; all men 
were dark and without understanding. Buddhism 
and Taoism had spread all over the place, and men 
worshipped only the gods they could see. 



170 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" Seeing this, Mr. Stott's heart was pierced as with 
a knife ; in private he laboured in prayer that the 
good news of the gospel might spread far and near, 
nor did he begrudge time or money. For this end he 
opened schools, calling in the children of the poor to 
learn to read about God. Morning and evening he 
himself taught them from the Word of God, to know 
that they had souls which would never die. He told 
them also that they had sin, that sinners could not 
enter the kingdom of heaven ; also that God loved 
them and sent His Son into the world to save 
sinners. 

" Preaching the gospel then was not easy, for when 
Mr. Stott first came to Wenchow he did not under- 
stand the dialect, and had only a Ning-po man to 
help him rent a house and chapel. In the morning 
he taught the boys he had gathered into the school, 
and in the afternoon he preached in the chapel ; this 
he did every day. 

" One morning early I remember a rowdy named 
Ah-doa came to the gate, and, battering it with 
stones, demanded entrance. Mr. Stott asking him 
what he wanted, he answered : ' I want to sport 
inside ' (aimlessly amuse). He was told to come in 
the afternoon. He replied : ' I must get in now.' Mr. 
Stott went out to exhort him, when Ah-doa threw a 
stone, and had not Mr. Stott put his head a little 
on one side, it must have felled him to the ground. 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 171 

" Many were the dangers and trials he passed 
through, willing to bear all if only souls were saved. 
I was the first boy in school, and learned there for 
five years, and afterwards, through the grace of God, 
became a preacher. 

" When I first entered the school Mrs. Stott had 
not yet come to Wenchow, and Mr. Stott suffered 
much during the winter from neuralgia in his leg, 
but as soon as the pain was gone he was out preach- 
ing again. Seventeen years ago he opened a chapel 
at Bing-yie, but as soon as opened the people 
gathered in crowds, and tried to get up a riot to 
drive out the foreigner, forbidding him to preach. 
They did not know that Jesus would get the victory; 
for now there are over one hundred Christians in that 
place, and altogether in and around Wenchow there 
are now over three hundred converts. A little over 
two years after Mr. Stott came to Wenchow, Mrs. 
Stott arrived, and began work among the women and 
girls ; as soon as there were converts she instructed 
them in the Word of God, and taught them how to 
help others, forming them into a missionary band. 

" I remember six years ago that the Wenchow 
chapel and house and school were burnt down by a 
riotous mob. All the foreigners were driven from the 
city, and the disciples scattered ; but only a few weeks 
had gone by when Mr. Stott returned, and began to 
re-build, and during the five months the buildings 



172 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

were being erected our pastor had too much to do in 
attending to all the work himself. Then they had to 
live in the new house before it was quite dry, and 
thus, alas ! he caught disease of the lungs. 

"Three years ago Mr. and Mrs. Stott left for 
England, hoping to return shortly, but the disease 
which took our pastor to heaven only developed. 
For two years he suffered without complaint, glorify- 
ing God, then joyfully ascended to heaven. Mrs. 
Stott has returned to Wenchow, remembering that 
the sheep were without a shepherd. She would not 
leave nor forsake the disciples, and seeing some of 
them blind, poor, and old, she has opened homes to 
receive such that they might not suffer cold and 
hunger in their helpless state. Seeing that Mr. and 
Mrs. Stott have so earnestly done the will of God and 
kept all His commandments, their future reward must 
be great indeed." 

Translation of a Letter written by Lui-sie-kwai. 

" I wish to write a few lines about our pastor, 
named Mr. Stott. His native place was Scotland, 
where he was educated. He was sent out to China 
by the China Inland Mission to preach the gospel. 
His disposition was straight, and righteous, and very 
intelligent ; in that respect there are few men like 
him. To look upon him was to feel awe, but to know 
and come near him he was gentle and gracious. In 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED" 173 

all matters he thought all round first, and then acted. 
His words were few, but his wisdom was great. 
Whatever he said he always did ; his power and 
influence were felt by all. He might well be called 
the pillar of the church at Wenchow; everyone aimed 
and desired to be like him. Our pastor for many 
years gave himself to teaching and instructing. He 
loved much to go out and preach the gospel to others. 
He came to Wenchow twenty-four years ago, and two 
years later Mrs. Stott joined him. Together they 
worked the will of God, happy that they were chosen 
for such work, leaving friends and relations and native 
country for distant Wenchow, learning our native 
dialect so that they might understand our language. 
They organised churches, opened and maintained 
boarding-schools, not regarding time nor money, 
receiving orphans and other poor children, teaching 
them to read and understand the Bible. Not afraid 
of toil and suffering, he went out to near and distant 
places preaching, selling books, and helping the dis- 
tressed. All this he did that the gospel might spread 
abroad. 

" Alas ! the district o.f Wenchow is given up to the 
worship of idols more than many other places ; 
learned and unlearned alike worship idols. Mr. 
Stott seeing things in this condition, his heart was 
stirred up like a fire. He prayed, with sorrow and 
distress, that God would look down and pity the 



174 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

people. Soon God gave the answer, and the gospel 
spread to different places. Three churches were 
formed at Wenchow, Bing-yang, and Dong-ling. At 
each chapel there was a native preacher. Our pastor 
was not afraid of toil ; every month he went himself 
to those stations preaching, teaching, and examining 
converts. In all this work Mrs. Stott was his helper, 
she also teaching and instructing women and girls ; 
and when souls were saved she taught them how to 
help others, and formed a ' Native Women's Mis- 
sionary Band/ caring for the helpless and sorrowful, 
the cold and the hungry. All that was good con- 
nected with the church they earnestly and devotedly 
attended to, spending their whole strength in the 
work. For many years they thus worked, and are 
the foundation of the church. Now there are over 
three hundred converts. Is not this good ? 

"In 1887 Mr. and Mrs. Stott returned to their 
native land to visit once more their relations and 
friends. They had only gone a few months when 
Mr. Stott developed disease of the lungs. The best 
doctors in medicine were called in and used, but it 
was God's will to call him home, and after nearly two 
years of suffering he fell asleep, joyfully entering the 
happy land. When the news reached Wenchow the 
church members wept bitter tears, our hearts were 
heavy and sad ; but, reflecting on our pastor's virtues, 
old and young gave grateful thanks for his grace in 



" THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED " 175 

teaching them. All who knew and received this grace 
feel deeply that they are separated from him, and are 
very sad. Thinking of the words and actions of our 
beloved pastor, I cannot tell nearly all his goodness, 
but send these few lines. Let those who read not 
despise my simple words." 

The above was sent to the Chinese Christian paper 
for publication. 



CHAPTER XIII 

" He will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry ; when 
He shall hear it, He will answer thee." ISA. xxx. 19. 

DURING the last few weeks of Mr. Stott's life 
he frequently prayed that God would raise up 
one who might be as a daughter unto me. in whom 
my lonely heart might find comfort, and one who at 
the same time would be a real help in the work. So 
sure did I feel God would answer his prayer that 
I was not in the least anxious about the matter, know- 
ing that at the right time God would manifest the one 
He had in keeping for me. I was to sail in Novem- 
ber, but up to October was without guidance in the 
matter. When at Keswick Convention in July Miss 
Bardsley was introduced to me as a young lady going 
out to China in the autumn, how little I then 
thought she was the one God had appointed. From 
Scotland I wrote to Mr. Broomhall to have my 
passage taken for November 28th. Friends thought 
I was too rash in deciding the date of my sailing 

while as yet no companion had been found ; but God 

176 



" H WILL ANSWER THEE '' I?; 

says, " He that believeth shall not make haste," and 
He kept me at rest. 

Returning to London in October to spend the re- 
maining six weeks with dear Mr. and Mrs. Broomhall, 
who had ever been father and mother not only to the 
young candidates, but also to the returned mission 
aries, I found there was a party sailing the following 
week of whom Miss Bardsley was one. The arrange- 
ments had all been made, passage taken, " Good- 
byes " said, and it seemed as though it were too late 
to suggest a change ; yet I felt sure she was the one 
whom God had chosen for me. On mentioning this 
to Mr. Broomhall, and afterwards to Mr. Taylor, the 
suitability was also apparent to them, and they 
kindly suggested she should be kept back, while 
her place was rilled by another ; and, what was more 
remarkable still, upon my asking Miss Bardsley 
"whether she would like to accompany me as a 
friend and companion ?" she unhesitatingly replied 
"Yes," and at the same time told me that it 
was the expressed desire both of her father and 
mother, who had met me months before. Thus on 
all sides God's will was manifested. And now for 
six years she has been all my husband prayed for a 
loving, helpful daughter. 

On November 28, 1889, 1 sailed on my third voyage 
for China, accompanied by six young ladies going out 
for the first time. We had both a pleasant and profit- 

13 



178 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

able voyage. We of course went second-class, and 
had a full complement of passengers, and for that 
reason we had first-class cabins apportioned near the 
officers' quarters. The one Miss Bardsley and I had 
was a three-berth cabin, large and airy, with two 
windows, which kept it delightfully cool, and into 
which we packed daily ten for reading and prayer 
as soon as the first days of sea-sickness were over. 
The captain was a nice, kind man, and the chief 
officer a decided Christian. One day while the 
former was on his usual tour of inspection, he seemed 
amused at seeing so many of us. I laughingly said : 
" We are not always so packed, captain ; we have 
only gathered for a little prayer," and asked him to 
see how beautifully we had managed. He turned to 
the purser who accompanied him, and said : " You 
are not taking in more passengers, are you?" He 
replied : " Yes, sir, at Naples." He then said : " Not 
here ; they are full." In this kindly way he gave the 
hint to let us have the cabin to ourselves, though it 
was fitted up for three. 

Amongst our passengers there was a Christian 
colonel of the Bengal Army who was a great help 
to us, and he, with the captain's permission, began 
Bible readings at 10.30 in the second saloon, which 
were attended by a fair number of our fellow-pas- 
sengers. One day he asked " if I had pluck enough 
to give an address, and repeat some of the yarns I 



*' HE WILL ANSWER ftiEE " i^ 

had told him ? " Of course I promised, and a 
goodly number attended. The following Sunday 
after prayers, read by the captain, a request came 
from the passengers that I should give a little account 
of the work in China. The captain had the decks 
prettily arranged with awning, acted as chairman, and 
kindly introduced me. There were about thirty pre- 
sent, and before separating they asked for another 
similar meeting. These little services, though un- 
sought on our part, were gladly welcomed. One of 
the passengers, in conversation, said I had just de- 
scribed his case ; he had once come to the point of 
almost deciding, "and went slowly back," and he 
seemed much concerned. Our Christian colonel gave 
two most interesting addresses on " The Tabernacle " ; 
the captain, one or two officers, and a goodly number 
of the first-class passengers attending. The young 
ladies held meetings among the sailors, and two or 
three professed conversion. 

We were sorry to leave our good friends at Colombo, 
for we could not help noting the change that had 
come over many of our fellow-passengers; dancing and 
noisy fun had been discarded, while a few sought 
conversation on spiritual things, though at first we had 
been avoided. The captain expressed his regret 
that he could not take us on to Shang-hai, and in this 
regret we all shared. 

At Colombo on Christmas Day we transhipped to 



i8o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

the S.S. Clyde, where we were delayed four hours 
longer than we expected. We had said all our "good- 
byes," but the chief officer returned, as he said the 
temptation of another sight of us, and good-bye, was 
too great to withstand ; he had been so much cheered 
and helped by our intercourse. As we passed the 
S.S. Rohilla and waived an adieu to our old friends, 
the sailors gave us three ringing cheers, and we felt 
rather like leaving home again. 

We had a rough passage from Singapore, and 
reached Shang-hai on January 13, 1890, where we 
were lovingly welcomed by many old friends. Ten 
letters from different parts of China awaited me, full 
of tender sympathy ; but the sorrow and loss pressed 
heavily on me, yet above all I could hear His 
whisper, " Like as a mother comforteth ... so have 
I comforted you " ; and it was blessed to feel able 
to say "My will is the will of my God," without even 
wishing that it should be otherwise. Miss Whitford, 
one of our party, desired, if possible, to work with us 
in Wenchow, and as Miss Judd, who had then charge 
of the girls' school, was alone, the way seemed opened 
for her, and Mr. Stevenson willingly consented, so 
she accompanied us. 

We reached Wenchow in the morning of February 
4th. As soon as we had anchored, I saw Mrs. S., 
of the Methodist Free Church, coming (Mr. S. was in 
the country); then Mr. and Mrs. G., and Miss J. of our 



HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 181 

own Mission ; but the first to meet me were my two 
faithful servants. For many years they had served 
me with a devotion rarely met with in this country, 
and for a moment they seemed to forget their loss in 
the joy of seeing me again. All along the road the 
Christians were hurrying to bid me welcome, and by 
the time I had reached the house many others had 
gathered. The news seemed to fly, for by the next 
day some had come twenty miles to show their love. 
I know not how I got through the first two days ; the 
sorrow of our dear people made my heart bleed 
afresh, and often as they went into the study, to see 
the large portrait of their beloved pastor, tears would 
flow as they sobbed, " It is himself, but he cannot 
speak to us." "If only he had come back to us for 
a few years longer," came from many lips. Dearly 
was he loved, and much missed by his people. " O 
God, give me all the wisdom and strength needed, 
to be a mother to this shepherdless flock," was my 
daily prayer. An extract from a letter of Miss 
Bardsley's will be interesting at this point: 

" I shall never forget the scene on our arrival. The 
native Christians had heard the whistle of our steamer, 
and surrounded Mrs. Stott at once, and when we got 
into the house a few minutes later we found the sitting- 
room half filled with them, many crying bitterly, Mrs. 
Stott sitting in the middle of them. It was most 
touching to see them take her hands and weep over 



182 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

them ; this continued all the week. It was a heart- 
breaking week. The native Christians came in from all 
the country round, many of them walking ten and 
twenty miles ; they all went into the study to see the 
life-size portrait of Mr. Stott, and at the sight burst 
into tears. You have no idea how they love and 
honour Mrs. Stott, and they are a nice lot of people 
too ; you can see they are Christians by their faces." 

Two days after our arrival, Mr. and Mrs. G. left for 
their own station, Bing-yie, about thirty-three miles 
south of us. Carpenters and bricklayers had soon to 
be called in, to repair the damage done by white ants, 
as part of the floors were quite eaten through, and the 
house needed to be cleaned throughout ; but in three 
weeks we were in order again. The Christians were 
all eager for me to visit them, so beginning with the 
nearest places first, I went to a village seven miles 
distant from the city, to the house of a man who had 
been for years the only Christian in that place. My 
delight was great to find ten converts now, and nearly 
as many inquirers. After supper, twenty persons 
with Testaments and hymn-books gathered for 
evening service. I spoke from John iii., "God's love," 
and was followed by two of the converts, who gave 
such addresses as showed how they had grown in 
grace. In that village there are now twenty disciples, 
and a Bible reading has been conducted by one of 
the young ladies every Thursday afternoon. It takes 



HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 183 

her two hours to go and the same time to return, but 
it is labour well spent. This man who was at first 
and for years the only Christian, and who endured no 
small amount of persecution, has had the joy of seeing 
his wife, and wife's mother, his four children, two 
sisters-in-law, and a nephew all brought into the fold ; 
indeed, one of the encouraging features of our work 
now is, that so many families are one in Christ Jesus, 
although years often elapse between the first and the 
last convert. I had with me a dear woman who has 
ever since been a very faithful and much-used Bible- 
woman. She with many others had been brought to 
the Lord during our absence. 

The following Saturday, Miss Bardsley and I went 
to Dong-ling. The members there were most urgent 
for me to visit them, as many could not come to the 
city. We arrived about 6 p.m., the journey taking 
six hours, although only twenty miles distant ; Mr. 
and Mrs. G., from Bing-yie, joined us. As the people 
knew I was coming they turned out in force, the chapel 
was crammed from end to end, many standing out- 
side. This was the new chapel which had been re- 
built in place of the one burned during the riot in 
1884, and seated about one hundred ; but there were 
quite one hundred and fifty present at both meetings. 
I took the afternoon service, and with tears gave them 
the last message of their beloved pastor ; they were 
all deeply affected. 



184 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

It was at this time I began the homes for the blind 
men and old widows. We had in the church seven 
or eight blind men unable to work for themselves, and 
without sons to care for them : my heart was burdened 
week by week as I saw them led into the chapel, and 
I felt sure God would have me do something for their 
relief. There was one dear old saint about eighty, 
not blind, for whom I was especially anxious to pro- 
vide, and when we got a little house for their accom- 
modation this old man could hardly be persuaded to 
take sufficient food ; when urged to take advantage 
of what had been provided he replied, " I could not 
get two meals a day before, why should I eat three 
now ? " A few widows in similar circumstances were 
also housed in our compound, and for the support 
of this, as well as every other branch of the work, 
the Lord gave abundantly. Money goes further in 
China than in England ; 4. IDS. being ample to sup- 
port a man or woman for a year. 

From one cause or another, the few whom my 
husband had formed into a Volunteer Preachers' Band 
had been scattered ; one had died, two had been made 
preachers, the others had lapsed ; this branch, there- 
fore, had to be re-organised. Villages were crying out 
for preachers ; we had none to send, and I was averse 
to employing any but, as far as I could judge, " God- 
given men." I therefore appealed for volunteers, im- 
pressing upon the church members the responsibility 



"HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 185 

of souls, and urged that as God had sent the gospel 
to them, " without money and without price," it was 
their privilege as well as duty to give it to others. I 
promised to defray travelling expenses of any who 
would freely give up the half of Saturday and the 
whole of Sunday to gospel work. Four responded 
to the first appeal, they were formed into a class, and 
districts given them. We had a meeting for prayer 
once a month, when they gave me their reports, men- 
tioning any cases of interest that had occurred. As 
calls for teachers from other villages came, preachers 
were forthcoming, until now we have fourteen who 
freely give their time to the Lord on Sundays, while 
working at their trades and farms during the week. 

We felt something must be done for the teaching 
of these men, as they were deprived of the Sunday 
services, and a few could hardly read, and thus draw 
the water of life for themselves to them the well 
was deep. After much thought and prayer, we de- 
cided to invite them for a month's Bible study, during 
which time I offered them hospitality, but no re- 
muneration. This invitation was gladly responded 
to. I gave up myself entirely to them during that 
month, and the advantage of two Bible classes daily 
were keenly appreciated ; the intervening time they 
spent in learning to read better. 

After the first year or two, being anxious to know 
how these men preached, I proposed that the after- 



186 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

noons should be devoted to this, that they should 
preach as though to a congregation, and allow the 
native pastor and myself to criticise, we explaining 
that our object was to help them to understand and 
handle the Word of Life. At first they were a little 
nervous, but before the classes closed they begged for 
another week in the autumn of such helpful teaching, 
so we have now five weeks in the year devoted en- 
tirely to their instruction. It would be interesting to 
add a few notes of some of their addresses. 

Feb. 1 8. In morning, Tsie spoke on Matthew 
iv. 18-22. These four fishers left all to follow Christ. 
We teach new believers that they must leave all lusts 
of flesh, &c. As to us older Christians : in fishing we 
use our own nets, but in catching men must leave our 
own nets, our own ways, wisdom, &c. Yet we must 
have a net, z>., the gospel. Glory, eternal glory, to be 
obtained by catching men. Fishermen sometimes 
have no work, so go off and do something else. 
Christ calls us to always be fishers of men (2 Tim. 
iv. r, 2). We have proof that three of these dis- 
ciples were truly faithful unto death. We must 
pray for those who are not going out preaching this 
year [two had just withdrawn]. Peter faltered and 
went back, but only for a short half-hour or so. If 
we are truly chosen of God, have received our office 
from Him, we must be careful not to go back. To 
catch men is harder than to catch fish. In fishing we 



" HE WILL ANSWER THEE " 187 

fear cold and exposure; in catching men must fear 
coldness of heart. Even in fishing for men the disciple 
may be called upon to suffer cold, hunger, persecu- 
tion, &c. Peter, James, and John followed Christ most 
closely, and were most dearly beloved, and yet they 
suffered most. Their one desire was to " catch men" ; 
snow, rain, cold, nothing prevented them. If father 
or master tells son to go out and fish in the evening, 
on return first question will be, " How many fish 
have you caught?" Even though there is not a 
word of fault-finding at the few caught, that son or 
servant will be ashamed. To catch men is most 
difficult, because we have to get to their inner heart. 
Have to use different nets to catch different kinds of 
fish. 

O-dzing Ah-lie spoke on Matthew v. 1-7. He was 
very nervous at first, but gained more confidence later 
on : The " poor in spirit " in Chinese is Shu-sang 
(" shu " means empty), so it is only when we come to 
God as beggars, realising we have no goodness, no 
merit of our own, that He will be willing to receive 
and bless us. Example, the prayer of the Pharisee 
and publican. 

"They who mourn" mourn for their own sins, 
the sins of their relations, friends, and others un- 
converted. Example : Mary weeping at the Lord's 
feet, mourning her sins, and how He comforted her. 
' The meek," not only those who treat their friends 



i88 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

well, but those who when ill-treated bear no grudge 
and do not get angry ; they will be blessed. Example : 
the contention between the herdsmen of Abraham 
and Lot. Abraham willing to divide off and let Lot 
have choice of land : that was true meekness. 
Abraham's descendants received Canaan, but we 
shall receive an incorruptible inheritance. After a 
long journey over mountains, how good a drink of 
water tastes, and how we enjoy our food. We should 
have just such a hunger after hearing the word of 
God, and after righteousness. God has promised to 
fill. 

Feb. 25. Chung-dzi spoke on that subject which 
is unfortunately so fruitful to the Chinese mind in 
similes and symbols, the Good Samaritan. . . . 
Jerusalem heaven, Jericho earth. Our soul origi- 
nally comes from heaven ; when we are born into this 
earth we suffer from soul's enemy, sin, &c., robbers. 
Clothes our good deeds. Priest Jewish priests, or 
Confucianists, Taoists, vegetarians, &c., nowadays, or 
Roman Catholics, who say they forgive sins, but 
cannot heal our souls. Levite those who teach law ; 
it cannot save our souls. Samaritan Christ, who 
saw us injured and half-dead as result of sin, and 
had pity. Oil Holy Spirit ; if we haven't Him to 
open our hearts, we will not recognise God or Christ. 
Wine Christ's blood. Beast Christ's grace ; if we 
haven't this we will never be able to get along on the 



"HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 189 

heavenly road. Inn chapel ; there we get food and 
help in various ways. Innkeeper pastor. 

Pastor Tsie in commenting on the above, spoke 
of how, in interpreting parables, we must keep to the 
point of what Christ originally meant to teach by it. 
For example, here Christ gave the parable because 
of the scribe's question, " Who is my friend ? " Be- 
sides this meaning we may afterwards get other 
meanings, as Chung-dzi did. Jesus our conscience. 
If we all acted according to our conscience we would 
meet no trouble or danger. Leaving our conscience 
we " go down." When the Samaritan came along 
the man was unconscious ; so were we when Christ 
came to save us. 

Feb. 26. Tsing-kwai spoke on Matthew xv. 
21-29, well and to the point: lessons of faith, un- 
ceasing prayer, humility. In the afternoon, Koe-yi 
[Nga-yue's husband] on Hebrews v. n, &c. : Mel- 
chisedec a priest (Heb. vii. 3), God alone is without 
father, &c. (v. 12). An apprentice learns three years 
or so, afterwards becomes workman ; first is given 
easy things to do. Though he spoke very shortly it 
was to the point, and on the whole good. He is 
evidently profiting by his wife's knowledge of the 
Scriptures. 

Another day the 5th, I think the pastor spoke 
on the best ways of preaching the gospel, taking as 
examples Christ and the apostles. Christ fitted His 



190 MISSION WORK: IN 

preaching to the kind of listeners He had. To 
the Samaritan woman he spoke in one way, suit- 
able to her occupation of drawing water. To the 
country people who came to hear He spoke of the 
sower, mustard-tree, &c. To the Pharisees, &c., He 
used the Old Testament and Law (Luke iv. 16-22). 
To His disciples He preached the mysteries of God's 
Word and kingdom. 

The pastor certainly has the gift of teaching, and 
also is a thorough critic. These meetings were really 
quite helpful to us foreigners as well as the natives, 
and often created subjects for discussion and pretty 
deep thought. 

We had all this year (1890) in our compound the 
poor persecuted people from O-dzing to feed and care 
for, as the magistrates refused to allow them to 
return until the case was finished. One family con- 
sisted of father, mother, two sons, the wife, and only 
child of the eldest (the betrothed wife of the younger 
son had returned to her home, but her parents fearing 
they might be implicated sent her back, so she, too, 
made her way to the city, and they were married at 
once). Three of this family, who were only en- 
quirers before, came out decidedly on the Lord's side, 
and after some months of testing were baptized. 
The poor little baby sickened and died, but though 
they all felt the Lord's hand was heavy upon them, 
their faith failed not, giving glory to God. They 



" HE WILL ANSWER THEE n 191 

gained much Bible knowledge during the year, in- 
deed it was wonderful the progress they made ; daily 
at morning prayers their faces fairly beamed. The 
Lord was preparing them, during this long waiting, 
for service in their own village by and by, and they 
were thus better fitted to be teachers of others. The 
second son is now one of our most devoted unpaid 
preachers. Every Sunday morning he starts about 
4 a.m. for a village ten miles from his home, where 
he conducts two services, returning in the evening. 

During the time of weary waiting, many were 
discouraged and disappointed that we had not more 
power in compelling the magistrates to bring about a 
settlement. Our hope and help were in God alone, 
and we decided to spend three mornings in prayer. 
One of the meetings has been described by Miss B. 
in a letter to her friends, from which I give ex- 
tracts : 

"June 24, 1890. It was decided to meet 
Saturday, Sunday, and Monday forenoon, June 
2 ist, as on those dates we expected many of the 
Christians from the country districts, who come 
in once a month to remember the Lord's death. 
We had had continuous rain for some days, and 
by Saturday the roads were flooded, and it was 
impossible for many to get in. The first meeting 
was at 10 a.m. Saturday ; there were about thirty 
present After the opening prayer the pastor read 



192 MISSION WORK /AT CHINA 

the parable of the unjust judge, and said that 
God did not answer prayer simply to be rid of 
people's prayers, for He has their good at heart, &c. 
He afterwards said that there were many passages in 
both Old and New Testaments proving that God 
heard and answered prayer ; had they ever expe- 
rienced any answers to their prayers ? At once one 
of the blind men said : * Three or four years ago, when 
I was a young Christian and knew little of God, I 
was much tried about my son, who had become 
careless and idle in his habits, had left his work, and 
nothing I said seemed to influence him. I took the 
matter to God, told Him I was helpless and ignorant, 
not knowing how to pray aright. I told Him how 
disobedient my son was, and asked Him to influence 
his heart and make him go to work again. My son 
had gone out in the morning and I did not know 
where he had gone to ; but just after I had prayed, a 
neighbour came in and told me my son had gone to 
his work. Thus the Lord heard and answered while 
I was praying.' 

" The preacher then asked if any one had anything 
else to say, and another of the blind men began: 
'You all know I was an opium-smoker before I 
trusted in Jesus. I knew I could not be a follower 
of Christ and smoke opium. I prayed God to give 
me strength to break it off. It was a hard struggle, 
for I had smoked for twelve or fourteen years. The 



"HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 193 

first day in the morning, the desire for opium came 
upon me. I had decided not to take any medicine, 
but trust in the Lord, so I knelt down and prayed. I 
told the Lord how bad I felt and how the desire for 
the opium was tormenting me, and how helpless and 
weak I was. While I prayed the desire left me, but 
about mid-day it came back again, and again I 
resorted to prayer, and was relieved. And so for 
three days, three times a day, the desire returned, 
and was each time relieved by prayer alone. Then 
I got the final victory, and have never had any desire 
for the drug since.' 

" The pastor then gave his experience, and told a 
truly remarkable story. He said, c Some years ago, 
when I was at the station of Bing-yie preaching, the 
little chapel was crowded. Amongst the audience 
was a man making a great noise, talking incessantly, 
so that I could not get the attention of the people. 
I asked him to be quiet, but the people answered, 
" It is no use talking to him, he has been out of his 
mind for some years." The man continued noisy, so, 
not knowing what to do, fearing to turn him out, I 
lifted my heart to the Lord for strength. Pointing 
with my finger at the man, I said with a loud voice, 
" In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, come out 
of him." The man sat down quietly, shut his eyes 
as if asleep, and I continued preaching. By and by 
I told the people I was going to pray to the God of 



194 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

heaven, and asked them to kneel down with me. 
The man who had been possessed knelt down with 
them, and after prayer came up to me, and in a quiet 
voice said, " Many thanks, many thanks. I have been 
out of my mind for ten years ; now I feel quite well ; 
I will go home to my friends and to my work." ' The 
pastor added, ' I do not know where he is now ; he 
did not attend the chapel nor become a Christian, but 
some months afterwards I heard he was still in his 
right mind and at his work.' He told this story to 
show what power there still is in the very name of 
Jesus. The meeting closed after six or seven had 
prayed. 

"The second meeting was held at three o'clock 
in the afternoon. The passage read was Peter in 
prison, and the church praying all night in the house 
of John, and as they prayed Peter was released by a 
miracle. After that the pastor asked if there were 
any more testimonies to answered prayer. The elder 
of the O-dzing women who was so cruelly beaten, ill- 
used, and driven from her home, said, * I have got 
something to tell.' She looked as though she had 
too ; her face beamed with joy. She has a beautiful 
expression ; I wish you could see it as, morning by 
iiorning, she drinks in the words when Mrs. Stott is 
explaining the Scriptures. I love to watch her, and 
to think of the bright smile of welcome and the 
'Well done' that is awaiting her from the Lord she 



"HE WILL ANSWER THEE" 195 

loves so well and has suffered so much for. She 
said, ' It was only the beginning of last year that the 
gospel reached our village, and after I had believed 
I wanted to have preaching on Sundays, that the 
neighbours, too, might know of the love of Christ. 
My house is very small, and there is a family in the 
village who had a nice large room that I thought just 
the thing for preaching in. I began to pray that 
God would save that household, and turn the guest 
hall into a preaching hall. I continued praying two 
months, and at the end of that time all were brought 
to the Lord' she did not say how many persons 
were in the family ' and the room was given up as a 
preaching hall.' It was very touching to hear this 
woman praying for the persecutors by name, and in 
tears pleading that they might all become followers 
of the Lord Jesus, for the women as well as the men 
took part in prayer in these meetings. Time forbids 
me to go into details of all these meetings they 
were very blessed times, as one after another poured 
out their hearts to God, several with tears. God 
grant they may be the means of much blessing in 
the future. The case of persecution is not yet 
settled, though the magistrate has himself been in 
the place, and we are hoping that something will be 
done soon. 

" The pastor is now preaching every evening in the 
Street Chapel at the Blind Men's Home. He has had 



196 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

large crowds ; as the novelty wears off the numbers 
will decrease ; but those who are really interested in 
the truth will continue going. Will you join us in 
prayer that many may pass from ' death into life ' 
in that room, that God may thereby be glorified." 



CHAPTER XIV 

"And both Jesus was called, and His disciples, to the marriage. "- 
JOHN ii. 2. 

ABOUT this time one of our school-girls was 
married ; they had waited my arrival, and as it 
was the first Christian marriage Miss B. had ever wit- 
nessed in China, she gives the following interesting 
description : 

" There was a wedding here yesterday of more than 
usual interest, for it was a real love affair, which is not 
often the case in China, where, as a rule, the young 
people do not see one another until after marriage. 
The engagement is contracted by the parents when 
the children are both little, and the poor girl never has 
any voice in the matter. On the wedding day she is 
taken to her husband's home to live with his parents, 
whom she has probably never seen before. The bride 
was one of the school-girls, a fine girl and an earnest 
Christian ; the bridegroom was brought up in Mr. 
Stott's school with his elder brother, and when old 
enough, Mr. Stott apprenticed them to a tailor to 

197 



198 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

learn that trade. They have both been diligent, and 
have now a good business of their own and a nice 
house too, so the bride will have every comfort, though 
she does not go to a home of her own exactly, for his 
mother, two brothers, and their wives live there ; but 
as that is the custom in this land, I suppose they will 
not mind it as much as we should. 

" This young man came to Mrs. Stott five years ago 
to ask her to give him a wife, and said he wanted 
Vong-yang (the one he has married). Mrs. Stott told 
him she was much too young, and she could not think 
of it. He was not a Christian, and that was the 
great barrier, for Vong-yang was ; but she did not 
give that as her reason, or he would have soon become 
one in name, and that was what she wished to avoid ; 
there is far too much of a nominal Christianity in 
England for her to wish to see it here. About two 
years after he came again to Mrs. Stott, saying his 
brother was very anxious for him to marry, and that if 
she would only promise him Vong-yang he would 
wait for her, and his brother would be satisfied. She 
told him that though she would not promise him this 
girl, if on her return to China (she was just about to 
leave for England) she heard a good report of him, she 
would give him a wife. 

" I ought to have told you that before this he found 
some means of communicating with the girl, and told 
her he would wait for her, and never marry any one 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 199 

else, begging her to refuse to marry any one who 
should ask for her. The school-girls have a great 
advantage over all other Chinese girls ; when a young 
man asks for one she is always told of it, and allowed 
to decide for herself whether she would like to 
marry him or not. During Mrs. Stott's absence the 
young man came out boldly on the Lord's side, and 
was baptized by Mr. G., and when he again asked for 
a wife he was not refused, and we all rejoiced at the 
prospect of their happiness. The preparations began 
a few days since, and as the marriage took place here, 
I have been able to watch the proceedings. 

"The room where the ceremony was performed 
was draped with scarlet, that being the bridal colour, 
and the ceiling hung with all sorts and shapes of 
lamps, and very pretty they looked when lighted. 
Some of the chairs had scarlet covers, and cushions 
beautifully embroidered with gold ; I have never seen 
such lovely work. All these things were hired, with 
the dresses of the bride and bridegroom ; this is the 
custom here, as the clothes are never worn on any 
other occasion. Our cook gave up his room, for after 
the marriage they did not go away, but stayed here. 
The ceremony took place at 7 p.m., and Mr. S. was 
asked to conduct the service. When we went in, we 
found the friends assembled ; the bridegroom standing 
on a scarlet blanket, awaiting his bride. His dress was 
not very nice to me it looked very like a dressing- 



200 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

gown ; he looked much nicer the next morning in a 
maroon silk top garment ; he wore a mandarin's hat, 
that is round, with a red tassel on the top. 

" In a few minutes there was a slight stir amongst 
the people, and some one whispered, ' She is coming/ 
I looked in the direction of the movement, and saw 
* something' being led in by two women, which turned 
out to be the bride; it was certainly necessary to lead 
her, for she could not see where she was going. I will 
describe the dress, beginning at the feet: scarlet satin 
shoes, beautifully embroidered entirely by herself; a 
bright green satin skirt, embroidered with gold ; a 
scarlet satin top garment, also embroidered with gold, 
with nuts and fruit sewn on ; on the head a sort of 
helmet, very large and heavy, set with green stones 
and figures of men and women all over it ; at each 
side a sort of wing projecting, set with stones ; and 
all over this a scarlet silk veil, so that the face 
was quite hidden. You would never have known 
there was a human being inside. She was led on 
to the scarlet blanket, and her attendant held her 
while we sang the marriage hymn. I will give you a 
literal translation of it ; it will show you the idiom as 
well as give you an idea of the hymn : we sang it 
to the tune ' Duke Street.' 

" ' This day assembled, all, pleased, 

According to God's holy command, righteous act of marriage, 
Bridegroom, bride, two men made one, 
One home, one body, one heart, one mind. 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 201 

Like this, during life, together walk one road, 
Mutual honour, mutual faith, mutual love, mutual help, 

Heavenly Father, constantly protect and give peace, 

Not have calamity, weariness, suffering. 

Beseech heavenly Father, give happiness in the home, 
Give this couple happiness and joy, 

Obtain influence of Holy Spirit, to love the Saviour, 

During life, turn their heart to serve heavenly Father. 

Beseech heavenly Father, grant our prayer, 

Give this husband, wife, one pair till old age, 
Happiness together receive, suffering together endure, 

Death after, two men together in heaven.' 

The hymn being sung, the preacher prayed, then 
Mr. S. gave them a little exhortation, then another 
hymn and prayer, and the ceremony was over. The 
bride was taken to her room, which was close by, the 
bridegroom followed, and no more was seen of them 
that night. The bridegroom gave a feast to the men 
that evening, and the next day at I p.m. was the 
women's feast, to which we were all invited. When 
the meal was quite ready we were called, and had 
first to go and see the bride, who was sitting on her 
handsome wooden bedstead with another dress on, 
scarlet figured satin, trimmed with black satin. We 
each took a cup of tea (without sugar and milk, in 
real Chinese cups), after having drunk which, we 
made for the well-spread tables. There were three, 
but we foreigners had one to ourselves, and, during 
the first part of the time, the bride sat with us but did 
not eat anything ; it is the proper thing for her to 



202 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

hang down her head and look miserable. The bride's 
attendant sat with us and saw that we did justice to 
all the good things. There were special dishes pre- 
pared for us, and very good they were too. Let me 
try and describe the table ours was set for seven 
people. There was no cloth on ; each had red chop- 
sticks and a pewter ladle, a wee pewter wine-cup and 
plate, like dolls' things for size. There were twelve 
dishes in pyramid form, fancy meats, &c. There were 
four little bowls of vinegar and sauces, and by the 
side of each person a plate of monkey-nuts, shelled 
and roasted, and water-melon seeds also roasted. 
After taking all this in, I turned my attention to the 
other guests and found we were most improper, for 
we had gone to the seats given to us quite willingly, 
and at once; these other people had to be dragged to 
their seats, and made quite a little fuss about it, and 
that is the proper thing in China. 

"At last we were settled, and Mrs. Stott was invited 
to ask the Lord's blessing; after which the first dish 
was brought in, placed in the centre of the table, and 
the attendant asked us to eat. We all with our 
chop-sticks made a dive into the dish and conveyed 
the captured piece of fowl to our mouths. It was 
great fun. We used our ladles for the gravy. There 
were thirteen dishes brought in, one after the other, 
and we were expected to eat of each kind, and in just 
the same way. The last few were sweet dishes, and 



" JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 203 

they gave us each a piece of folded paper to wipe the 
table in front of us with, and one little bowl of water 
to wash our spoons in. We had still those twelve 
fruit dishes to eat from, but several remained un- 
touched at the last. After all that, came bowls of rice 
and five or six other little dishes ; it did seem too 
much, but I ate a little and then we were at liberty to 
go. We had been sitting there two hours and a 
quarter. During the meal the bridegroom's brother 
came several times and told us they had nothing for 
us to eat that is their way of being polite, I suppose. 
As we were leaving, we were each presented with a 
box of cakes and two parcels containing the things 
we had left at the feast. 

" I ought to have told you that all that morning the 
bride sat on her bed, with her attendant by her side ; 
she was dressed in her wedding dress, with the heavy 
ugly helmet on, and the red veil over it, and she has 
to receive the visits of all who wished to see her, and 
hear their remarks about herself, or anything else they 
liked to say. To all who went were given nuts and 
fruit. The bridegroom came to us, bowed low three 
times, and so did we, saying, 'I congratulate you'; he 
replying, 'I have troubled you.' 

"In the evening about seven o'clock, after a short 
service, the bride was taken to her husband's house, 
where he had gone before to be in waiting. I expected 
he would have taken her, but was told such a thing is 



204 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

never done in China: the husband never goes out 
with his wife ; he may sometimes with his mother, but 
not his wife, and they do not eat together. Oh, how 
different it is in our own dear England. A wife has 
no name in China ; she loses it on her marriage and is 
always called So-and-so's wife, or, if she has a son, the 
mother of So-and-so. 

"We went to call on the bride this afternoon, for, 
poor thing, she has to be dressed up for some days 
after her marriage and, sitting on the side of her bed, 
receive visits from all who want to see her. She has 
a very nice room we admired it all and took a cup 
of tea and cake, then a bowl of rice-flour balls in 
sweetened water. They tasted to me like flour and 
water boiled. After that we had another cup of tea, 
and rose to leave. I was sorry for the poor girl ; at 
the sight of us she began to cry, and turned her face to 
the wall ; her husband's relatives were much distressed 
lest we should think they were unkind to her; but she 
has been brought up in the school since she was a 
little thing, and it has been a happier home than she 
could ever have known elsewhere, and of course she 
felt leaving it. Mrs. Stott, and lately Miss Judd, have 
been like a. mother to her ; she is a very nice girl and 
a fine Christian ; she is now in a home where she and 
her husband are alone in serving the Lord, and I want 
to ask your prayers for them. They will find many 
difficulties, but if kept faithful and near to the Lord 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 205 

they may be the means of leading others to a know- 
ledge of the truth. 

" It is no easy thing to be a Christian in this dark 
land where Satan has so much power ; Christians at 
home know very little of what it is to really suffer for 
Christ's sake, and they have so much to help them 
onward, but these people have everything to drag 
them back and hinder. God is for them, and His power 
can keep them. Will you join us in prayer for all the 
native Christians that they may live Christ, and show 
by their lives that Christ does change them, and that 
they may go about more amongst their own people 
telling the good news of a Saviour's love?" 

Six years have passed since then, and it is beautiful 
to see the love between these two ; together they come 
to the chapel with their little child, and both have 
grown in "the grace and knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ," though as yet no other members of the 
family have been converted. 

How often we are called to "rejoice with those who 
rejoice, and weep with those who weep" ! In May 
Miss Judd and I went to Shang-hai to attend the 
general Missionary Conference; there we met Miss 
Boyd, who had just arrived from her station at Kiu- 
chau. She had come with the hope of attending the 
meetings and finding refreshment of spirit as well as 
body ; but the very first day after her arrival she was 
asked to go to Bing-yie to nurse Mrs. G. ; there was no 



206 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

one else to send, and, with that noble unselfishness which 
characterised her, she decided to go, and left at once. 
The G.'s were then living in an unhealthy native house. 

The weather became unbearably hot, and one day 
in the beginning of July we had a letter to say that 
Misses Boyd and Britton, with Mrs. G., had fever. Miss 
Whitford kindly offered to go to their help, to send 
Miss Britton and little Olive here while she remained 
to look after the other invalids. This step was of 
God, for the day after Miss W. arrived there, Miss 
Boyd was so ill they feared she might not get through 
the night. I had sent all the little delicacies I had, 
which proved a boon, but Miss B. continued to grow 
worse, and fearing if they remained there she and 
perhaps Mrs. G. too might die, they decided to run 
the risk of the journey (fourteen hours on the boat) as 
the lesser of two evils. 

On the morning of July the 8th they arrived. Mrs. 
S. kindly received Mr. and Mrs. G., while Misses B. 
and W. came here. Miss Boyd was very low indeed, 
but we hoped that our cool, healthy house, with 
careful nursing, and doctor's skill, might save her. 
In spite of all efforts, however, the fever raged night 
and day, until the I3th, when she seemed decidedly 
better; the fever was gone, and she slept a little, 
which she had not done for several days and nights. 
In the morning I was able, for the first time, to send 
a favourable report to the doctor, but alas ! it was 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 207 

only a flicker : at 10 a.m. the fever returned, and she 
became unconscious and remained so until 5 p.m., 
when she quietly fell asleep in Jesus. The other in- 
valids recovered, and were able to go by steamer to 
Che-foo for the change they much needed. 

During this summer and autumn we had much 
sorrow and loss, four of our native Christians died in 
one week, but we had comfort in them all. Miss J., 
who had charge of the girls' school, often ailing, now 
became seriously ill, and had to leave for England. 
Miss W. took charge of the girls' school, and although 
she had made very good progress with the language 
in the time, she was not able to talk much, so the 
school was practically thrown on my hands again, she 
doing the work, however, under my superintendence. 
But during all this time of persecution, sickness, death, 
and sorrow, wisdom and strength were given day by 
day. God had put me in that place of responsibility : 
' the work was His," " I was His " ; so " all was well," 
and it was sweet to feel His hand underneath, and 
His strength made perfect in weakness ; without this 
strength, heart and flesh would often fail. 

In the very midst of our own sorrows the steamer 
came in bringing heavy tidings four dear missionaries 
(not of our Mission, but all known to me) died in one 
week, and six of our own were dangerously ill ; these 
are times when one proves the power of God, and 
feels it all-sufficient. Joy blended with sorrow, as it 



208 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

usually does, for it is seldom our Father asks us to 
drink an unmingled cup five persons, decidedly con- 
verted, were baptized and received into the church at 
this time. 

A few notes taken down at the examination of 
these candidates will give an idea not only of the 
people, but of the kind of questions and answers 
asked, and given. They were all country people, 
three women and two boys, and came in a few days 
earlier to enable the pastor and myself to know them 
better ; the youngest of the women was nineteen, and 
had been a professed Christian about three years, her 
father and brother also being Christians, and all who 
knew her spoke well of her consistent life. The other 
women were aged respectively sixty-eight and seventy, 
the eldest was blind, and her remarks about the Lord 
Jesus loving such helpless ones were most touching ; 
she was a widow and childless, living with a nephew, 
who was not at all kind to her. On Saturday after- 
noon I sent for her to have a little talk, and on com- 
ing into the room she knelt to pray, not knowing 
any one was there. She thanked God that He loved 
blind people, it made her very happy, &c., and thanked 
Him for saving her through the blood of Jesus. I 
asked her when she heard the gospel first ; she replied, 
" Last year, in the eight month, I heard God would 
receive the blind, and lame, and no one else wanted 
them." Q. Are you a sinner ? A. I have committed 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 209 

many sins, but now all are gone. Q. How ? A. Jesus 
washed them away in His own blood. Q. What in- 
duced Him to shed His blood ? A. Because He loved 
us, and wanted to take us to heaven. Q. Supposing 
God were to call you away to-night, where would 
your soul go to ? A. To heaven. Q. Why ? A. 
Because Jesus saved me. Q. But you have not been 
baptized, and the Scriptures say, "Whosoever believeth 
and is baptized shall be saved." A. Baptism is by 
water ; water can wash my body but not my soul. 
Q. Then of what use is it ? A. It is a sign. Q. Of 
what? Here she did not know what to say, and I 
explained the true significance of the ordinance. She 
was examined in the chapel in the evening, but I 
need not give the answers here, though they were 
equally clear, and quite different from the above. 
The boys, fourteen and sixteen years of age, were ex- 
amined by the native pastor : they were both bright 
lads and their answers pleased us much. O. When 
did you first believe ? A. Last year, the ninth month. 
Q. What is the Lord Jesus to you? A. He is my 
Saviour. Q. Where does God live ? A. In my heart. 
Q. Where besides? A. In heaven. Q. By what 
means did Christ save you ? A. He died on Calvary's 
Cross for me. Q. And after that what did He do? 
A. He rose again the third day. Q. What is it to 
believe on the Lord Jesus? A. It is to be a new 
creature. Q. Are you a new creature ? A. Yes. Q. 



210 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

What evidence do you give of that? A. I used to 
curse, and swear, and quarrel with the other boys ; I 
don't do that now. Q. Suppose you were to die to- 
night, before you were baptized, where would your 
soul go to? A. To heaven. Q. Will baptism save 
you ? A. No. Q. What is the use of it ? A. To 
show that I have been saved. Q. Could you get to 
heaven by your own merit ? A. I have no merit. Q. 
You are young and may have to endure much perse- 
cution for Christ's sake, what then ? A. I will endure 
it. Q. But suppose the devil comes and tempts you 
to say and do wrong things, and tells you it is no use 
to depend on Christ for help, what then ? A. I would 
pray and ask God to hold me up. 

I thought such answers were grand from a boy of 
fourteen, who had never, until last year, heard the 
gospel message. We kept this lad a few weeks in 
order to give him further instruction in the Scriptures, 
and Miss B. taught him the Roman Colloquial along 
with the others (Mr. Soothill, of the Methodist Free 
Church, has translated the four Gospels and the Acts 
into the local dialect, and our young ladies have 
taught quite a number to use them). 

Sunday morning the chapel was crowded, the 
country Christians having come in, to remember the 
Lord's death ; the five were baptized before the usual 
service began, and it was a heart-stirring sight to see 
these poor women, just on the brink of the grave, 



"JESUS WAS CALLED TO THE MARRIAGE" 211 

confessing the Lord Jesus, after spending so many 
years in ignorance of Him, and the three young ones 
just beginning to serve Him ; again we realised that 
" the gospel is the power of God unto salvation to 
every one who believeth." Nothing touches the heart 
like the story of the Cross ; often have I noticed 
when we have been speaking of such subjects as 
"the blood," "the burnt-offering," &c., the tears of 
the women have fallen as we dwelt on the sufferings 
of Christ. 

At this time we began the first of our united 
quarterly meetings of preachers, which continued two 
or three years. We met alternately at Mr. S.'s house 
and our own, and at the first meeting no fewer than 
twenty-six were present, though none of the Bing- 
yie or Dong-ling preachers were there. Much of the 
time was spent in prayer, and nearly all referred to 
the time, over twenty years ago, when Mr. Stott, a 
solitary worker, came among them, and none knew of 
God's love ; and as we looked at those earnest faces 
and thought of them as preachers, again and again 
the tears would start, and the language of our hearts 
was " What hath God wrought." Mr. S. opened with 
an address, using as his text, "And without a parable 
spoke He not unto them," urging them to be simple, 
pointed, and short in their preaching; always to 
prepare carefully with prayer, and never to allow the 
thought that they had not time for that. He also 



2 1 2 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

spoke on I Cor. xi. 23-33, after which we all had 
dinner a la Chinois, the men in one room, the women 
in another. In the afternoon I spoke on Rom. xii. 
1-2, first, "Present your bodies," &c.; second, Sancti- 
fied and sent (John xvii. 16-18); third, Communion 
and Testimony (John xv. 27; Acts iv. 13); fourth, 
Love to Christ before Service (John xxi. 15-17) ; fifth, 
Enlightened, therefore giving Light (2 Cor. xiii. 14) ; 
after more prayer, and further remarks by the 
preachers, we separated, all feeling we had spent a 
good day. 



CHAPTER XV 

' And the common people heard Him gladly." MARK xii. 37. 

T ^ ARLY in October, I went to Tung-tso, when I 
J > was accompanied by Miss Bardsley; I give you 
her description of the ten days spent there : 

"October 2nd. We left Wenchow on our first 
country journey of the season. Our party consisted of 
two Christian boatmen, a native constable, an earnest 
inquirer, who will accompany us all the way, one of 
the young preachers, and our Christian cook. The 
first evening we went but a short distance, only cross- 
ing the river, which is over two miles wide, to the 
constable's village, where there are some inquirers 
and Christians. After taking our evening meal on 
the boat, we made our way to the constable's house, 
escorted by most of the village, to hold a service. We 
sat outside the house, and the people gathered round 
at once, some standing on forms and stools to get a 
better look at us. The young preacher, Chang-loa, 

spoke first. We had some books and tracts to sell, 

213 



214 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

and he told a little about them, reading and explain- 
ing part of one, and after that Mrs. Stott spoke ; the 
attention of the people was very nice ; most of them 
answered the questions put most intelligently, showing 
they not only heard, but understood a good deal of 
what was said ; then Chang-loa spoke again. The 
Christians present very much wanted us to have a 
service for them, but the crush of people made it 
impossible ; when we went into the house they all 
followed, and Chinese etiquette forbade their being 
turned out ; however, when we returned to the boat 
we were able to have a Bible reading with them and 
the inquirers. We slept on the boat, or rather we had 
intended to do so, but the rats kept us awake through 
their midnight gambols ; fortunately we had our mos- 
quito curtains with us, so they were unable to touch 
us. A preacher goes to this village every other 
Sunday. 

"October $rd y Friday. We were unable to go ashore 
again on account of the tide, but had another Bible- 
reading on board. After that we set off, and the next 
calling place was at the hut of some Christians, who 
were once beggars. After their conversion, many 
years ago, Mr. and Mrs. Stott helped them to get a 
few tools, and they built a hut on a hill, and began to 
till a little ground ; the original hut is now used as 
a chapel, and they have built themselves another 
house. After visiting them, we had a delightful four 



"THE COMMON PEOPLE HEARD HIM GLADLY" 215 

miles' walk through the rice-fields ; it was a glorious 
day, the sun not too hot and a nice breeze blowing 
from the sea ; on the one side of us were mountains 
as far as the eye could reach, and on the other the river 
flowing, mountains rising straight out of it in some 
parts. About two o'clock we reached a village where 
there are three Christians, and went there, hoping 
to hold services ; but the people are a very rough lot, 
and though Mrs. S. and the preacher both tried to 
gain their attention, no one listened, and after visit- 
ing two houses, we left for the boat again. On account 
of the tide we were obliged to remain where we were 
till midnight, and had to be content with a short 
service on the boat again. 

"Saturday. On wakening, we found ourselves at 
Soa-diu, the end of our boat journey; and after an early 
breakfast and prayers, we set off at 7 a.m. for Tung- 
t'so. I will try to describe our party : It was all so new 
and strange to me, and I want to give you some little 
idea of it now, as the novelty will have worn off 
before the next time. We had half a day's journey 
before us, across hills and rivers; we had one chair 
between us, and Mrs. S. started in it, we deciding to 
walk an hour and ride an hour alternately. Then there 
was the man with our bedding ; we had a wadded 
thing as a mattress, two rugs, pillows, &c., these were 
fastened up in a Chinese mat, and put on one 
end of the bamboo-pole, at the other the cook's and 



216 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

the men's bedding were hung ; this the man carried 
across his shoulders ; after him came another man 
with a variety of packages, such as our rice-bag, 
basket with the food, one containing three fowls, and 
other parcels varying in size and shape ; our cook 
came next, then the constable, preacher, and myself. 
It was a funny sight, so different from our mode of 
travelling at home. I hardly know how to describe 
the scenery, it was so grand ; we both said we never 
saw anything like it. A cloudless sky of the deepest 
blue, mountains of all shapes surrounding us, some 
were bold and bare, others covered with the lovely 
dark green and light bamboo, some almost perpen- 
dicular and went to a point, others again were rounded, 
but all were grand. The river, too, was of the clearest 
crystal ; once we stooped down to drink of its fresh 
waters, flowing from the hills ; it winds in and out 
between the hills for many miles, and as we took 
shorter cuts we had to cross it four times. Being so 
entirely surrounded by hills all the way, we wondered 
how we could get out, and no sooner did we leave the 
one valley than we were in another ; it was too grand 
to describe; we so often wish our friends could share 
it with us. 

" We reached our journey's end, about 12 a.m., tired 
and hungry. In a few minutes we were surrounded 
by most of the village; being the first foreign ladies 
they have ever seen, of course we were great wonders. 



"THE COMMON PEOPLE HEARD HIM GLADLY" 217 

We were hot, and longing to wash our hands and 
face, and on asking for water we had about a pint 
of hot water at the bottom of a bowl handed us, 
with a filthy face-cloth, which we politely declined, 
having our own with us. The Chinese process is 
to put your face-cloth, which by the way ought to 
be dirty to be proper, into the hot water, squeeze it 
out, and rub your face and hands that is all, no 
need to dry it ; such a thing is unheard of in China. 
We had to perform this in the presence of about 
one hundred people, then took our seats to be again 
inspected. Our dresses, boots, &c., were all touched 
and discussed; our eyes and hair, &c. This we en- 
dured until our dinner was ready, then went into 
the bedroom to partake of it. 

"While we are having dinner you shall have a 
peep at the room. A mud floor with holes all over, 
in one corner a heap of stones reaching one-third 
of the distance to the roof ; the partition boards on 
that side were supported by stones, between most 
of which you can put your hand, not one board fits 
its neighbour. The boards over our heads reach a 
little more than half across the room where the hay 
is kept, on the other side of the room is an open 
straw shed, where we can see the sky quite plainly, 
and as we eat our dinner boys and others have 
climbed up on the straw, and from all parts of the 
room are looking down on us. In one corner is an 



2i8 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

old truck with planks laid across for a bed, having 
a straw mat, the ends of which rolled up make 
a pillow, and the broken chair is the only other 
piece of furniture of which the room can boast. My 
first thought was 'a grand place for rats/ which 
experience has proved true; the boards are all thick 
with dirt, and dust is everywhere. Fortunately we 
are using basins and chopsticks, or the people would 
be more curious. We wanted to rest after dinner, 
but had to lie down with the gaze of many on us ; 
they were even on the loft over our heads. 

We had a service in the afternoon, Mrs. Stott, the 
young preacher, and his father, who is the preacher 
in this district, all speaking ; after that we escaped 
to the hill for a little quiet, but were followed by 
quite a crowd. There was another service in the 
evening ; the room was crowded, and probably all 
the village turned out. They listened very attentively 
as again the gospel was preached in all its fulness. 

" Sunday. Another glorious day ; the air here is 
so pure and sweet. As we sat on the hill after break- 
fast for a little quiet time, our hearts rose in praise 
and thankfulness to God for being permitted to 
enjoy His handiwork in this quiet spot. The scene 
around us was one of unequalled beauty, and in the 
valley at our feet lay the village, looking so peaceful 
and picturesque ; but oh, how full of sin and misery ! 
and yet there are a few in it who know what it is to 



"THE COMMON PEOPLE HEARD HIM GLADLY" 219 

be born of the Spirit, and have the Spirit of God 
dwelling in them. On returning we had the service, 
and Mrs. S. had an interesting talk with an old 
woman of eighty-one years of age ; she said, ' Oh, 
will you take me with you to heaven ? ' Mrs. S. re- 
plied, 'The Lord Jesus only can do that.' She 
answered, * Well, I ask Him every day to wash me in 
His blood.' ' Has He done it ? ' * I don't know, but 
it is the one thing I desire, and the one thing I pray 
for, and if you will only ask Him, He will hear 
you, for you are acquainted with Him.' The after- 
noon service began about I p.m.; the same persons 
spoke, one after the other, and when it was over, we 
escaped to the hill, and had three hours together there. 
It was a delightful rest after all the noise below. We 
climbed to the top of one of the hills and feasted 
our eyes on all the beauty around us ; there, alone, 
we had a quiet time of prayer, and sang that hymn, 
c How sweet the name of Jesus sounds.' May the 
Lord hasten the day when every valley and hill 
will resound with that precious name ! 

" In the evening the people would not go, begging 
Mrs. S. to speak again, saying her words were good. 
They understood every word, but she had used her 
voice so much that it failed her, and the old preacher, 
Mr. Poe, spoke a long time ; thus they heard the 
gospel three times, from three different persons each 
time. ' Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but 



220 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

God alone can give the increase.' Please pray with 
us that much fruit may be the result. 

"Monday. Mrs. Stott has been seeing candidates 
for baptism this morning while I write this. The 
three women she saw are all trusting Jesus, they say, 
but don't know whether they are saved. They will 
have to wait some time yet, and receive more in- 
struction ; these poor people are so very ignorant, 
they have everything to learn we can have no idea 
of their darkness. 

" After writing the above we went to the hill for an 
hour, coming back to dinner at n a.m. At 11.30 we 
all went to a village an hour's walk from here ; it is 
beautifully situated between the hills. The people 
round the district followed us into the house of the 
Christian, and there the gospel was preached by Mrs. 
S. and the two preachers. The people took down 
doors and windows, and stood in all corners of the 
guest hall ; there would be over a hundred present. 
Although I could not speak, I had to stand on a 
chair to be looked at ; it was quite a new experience. 
Five women standing near us listened most atten- 
tively, as did others, but many in the crowd were too 
much occupied with us to listen much. It is very 
natural, for we are the strangest sights they have ever 
seen. I don't know what they think of us, but one 
person said to another that we were barbarians. 

"One of the women who listened so attentively, 



'"THE COMMON PEOPLE tiEAKD tttM GLADLY" ill 

her face continually changing, led us to her house. 
We were followed by the crowd, and again they heard 
the gospel three times. The same woman then took 
us to the large ancestral hall belonging to the whole 
village, and from the theatre stage the gospel was 
preached By this time there would be quite three 
hundred people, and most of them listened very 
attentively, and at the close bought all the books we 
had with us. One little incident amused me rather. 
A man handed a dirty pewter teapot full of hot tea 
on to the stage, and we all took a drink from the 
spout ; after we had drunk, it was handed to several 
in the crowd. We had been five hours out in the hot 
sun, noise, and excitement, and on our return we 
again escaped to the hills, returning again at 6 p.m. 
for supper, refreshed and ready for the evening service. 
I gave the little boys another lesson on the Roman- 
ised, which I had begun to teach them in Wenchow, 
and then we had the service. The room was full, and 
the people most attentive and very quiet. The 
preachers were all hoarse by the close, and tired out. 
We feel sure there will be blessing from these meet- 
ings, and all who are interested will be able to receive 
further instruction from Mr. Poe. After we had re- 
tired to our room the Christians had a prayer-meet- 
ing; we counted twelve different prayers, several of 
which came from the lads, of whom there are said to 
be nine in this district who believe. 



222 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" Tuesday. Soon after 1 1 a.m. we started for other 
villages, and after walking one hour and three-quarters 
arrived at the furthest, taking the nearer ones on our 
return. Again the good news was proclaimed at five 
different places, but the last was the most interesting 
of all. When Mrs. S. rose to speak, she asked the 
people to be as quiet as possible, as her voice was 
weakened by so much out-door speaking. They 
listened so quietly, and were so interested, that she 
was encouraged to give them quite a long explanation 
of the gospel. We were altogether six hours and a 
half out, and had hardly time to take our supper 
when the people arrived for the evening service, after 
which there was another prayer-meeting by the native 
Christians. 

" Wednesday. We left Tung-t'so at 7.30 a.m., in- 
tending to stop at two or three villages on our way to 
Soa-diu, where our boat was waiting for us. The 
return journey, though different, was through lovely 
country. The first part of the way took us over a 
very high mountain path, where we had an extensive 
view ; on the way down we met the woman to whose 
house we were going, and as she was the only Chris- 
tian in the village and was unable to turn back with 
us, we decided to leave that visit to another time and 
push on to the house of an inquirer. There we had a 
very quiet and attentive crowd ; Mrs. Stott spoke for a 
long time, and the young preacher spoke twice; his 



"THE COMMON PEOPLE HEARD HIM GLADLY" 223 

father, Mr. Poe, had decided to stay the night there 
and give the people more instruction. The mother is 
the only one who seems interested in the truth, and she 
has not got very far, for the incense-pots were in their 
place, and in the bedroom (where we had dinner) there 
was a horrible-looking idol. About I p.m. we all set 
off once more, and reached Soa-diu about 3 p.m. The 
boatmen worked hard at the oars, hoping to reach a 
village, where there are three Christians, in time for 
evening service, but it was dark before we arrived and 
we dare not go to the house, as the people, not being 
able to see us in the darkness, would have got excited. 
" Thursday. Immediately after breakfast we went 
on shore and made our way to the house of the Chris- 
tians. Very few people came to hear, and those who 
did gather were not at all interested. This has always 
been the case in that place; preachers have been sent 
before and all say the same. The Christians begged 
us to hold a service in the evening there, saying some 
wanted to hear who were busy during the day in the 
fields ; Mrs. S. promised to do so, and then went to 
two more villages preaching ; in each the people were 
very attentive, and some seemed interested. In the 
evening we went to have prayer in the house of an 
old man who was dying; he believes the gospel, has 
heard the truth from the Christians. After that there 
was another service ; many men were present who 
were attentive and quiet ; we trust the interest aroused 



524 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

will be the beginning of a work of grace in that village. 
On gaining the boat at 9 p.m., Mrs. S. was so tired out 
that she threw herself down, too tired to undress or to 
sleep, and on Friday morning, instead of spending 
the day at Koa-diu as she had planned, gave orders 
to be rowed straight to Wenchow ; she had no strength 
for any more. 

"We reached home about 8 a.m.; the servants were 
at prayers, and we let ourselves in at the back door. I 
shall never forget the feelings of delight as I gazed 
round the nice clean rooms, the natives looking in 
often say to one another it is like heaven, and I felt I 
could echo their words. Our letters were waiting for 
us, but we did not even open them until we had had a 
bath and changed all our garments. In looking back 
on the journey, we have very much to thank God for; 
in most of the places the people listened, and, con- 
sidering we were the first foreigners they had seen, 
behaved well. We visited fourteen villages in the 
eight days, preaching twenty-three times, besides the 
daily Bible-readings with the Christians. The weather 
was delightful, and we were able to walk many miles 
a day from place to place. 

" In Tung-tso there are nine Christian boys, and we 
would very much like to give them some training ; in 
the meantime, we hope to bring them here for two or 
three months during the winter, but should the Lord 
provide us the means we will gladly give them two 



"THE COMMON PEOPLE HEARD HIM GLADLY" 225 

years. We say two years, for in less time than that 
they could hardly get instruction enough to make 
them useful in after life in teaching others, while a 
longer time would separate them too long from their 
natural employments and more or less unfit them for 
returning to them. Our desire is to help them that 
they may help others, and not to make paid teachers 
of them ; this is a matter that lies heavily on our 
hearts, we do not yet see the way to carry it out. 
Will you join us in prayer about this matter and also 
that fruit may be found from this journey?" 



CHAPTER XVI 

" In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy 
hand : for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or 
that, or whether they both shall be alike good." ECCLES. xi. 6. 

ON October 2Oth we went to Dong-ling to visit 
some of the older Christians, for although 
Mr. G. had now charge of that branch, they would 
not be satisfied until I had been to their homes, and 
indeed I was glad to see many of the old faces once 
more. Miss W. gives a description of our few days 
there, and, as it was her first country trip, she notes 
many details which will interest the reader which I 
am too much accustomed to to notice ; indeed I am 
much indebted to these younger workers for accounts 
of journeys which otherwise would never have been 
written. 

" Tuesday, October 2ist. Mrs. S. and I started this 
morning for Dong-ling about 9 a.m. We had about 
three and a half hours' journey up the canal between 
fields of rich grain just ready to be cut surrounded on 
all sides by high hills, some green, others rough and 

bare, but all equally beautiful. When we left the boat 

226 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 227 

we had a walk of some ten It over the hills to this 
house, where we hope to stay to-night. I cannot at- 
tempt to describe the beauties of the country around ; 
from the hill we could see the fertile plain beneath, 
and the hills terraced and cultivated, some with rice in 
various stages of perfection, some almost ready to be 
cut, and some still green ; in other places the sweet 
potato plant with its pretty leaves was creeping 
up the hillside, interspersed with tea and indigo 
plantations. We saw them threshing some of the 
corn, which they do in the fields as soon as it is cut, 
using a very primitive machine ; also the vats which 
they use for preparing the rich indigo blue dye for 
their clothes ; they strip the leaves off the plant, put 
them in one of these stone vats to soak for some 
days, and drain off the clear water, leaving the thick 
blue dye at the bottom. We also saw the holes in 
the hillside where they put their potatoes for the 
winter; they store them all there, cover them with 
earth and put a stone at the mouth, and they keep 
sweet until the next year. These people upon the 
hills have very little except rice and these potatoes 
to eat; occasionally, some little fish they find in the 
mud, or some one comes their way with a little salt 
fish to sell. 

"The man at whose house we are staying is the 
uncle of our milkman ; he and his wife are Christians, 
and there is a numerous family of children. This 



228 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

afternoon we went round the hill to a little village ; we 
next went into a house, and when the people had 
gathered round Mrs. S. spoke a few words, but they 
were too much occupied with us to listen very atten- 
tively, though one man seemed interested and bought 
a little book, he thought the doctrine was ' good, but 
difficult to observe.' Then we came back, and after 
washing our faces I sat down in front of the little 
house. (I am writing this with an old man deeply 
interested in the performance sitting beside me and 
occasionally puffing smoke into my face. I am 
writing five copies at once, which astonishes him very 
much). Close to me a woman has just been grinding 
some rice into flour in a manner very similar to that 
which our Saviour alludes to. She has the upper and 
nether millstones, a large tub underneath to catch the 
flour as it falls, and she turns it by means of a rope 
tied to the top stone and attached to a sort of swing ; 
the rice is on the top stone, which has a hole in it, 
through which it falls as it is needed. 

" Dong-ling^ Wednesday evening. By the time we 
had finished supper a goodly number of neighbours 
had gathered in for prayers. We sang, ' One there is 
above all others,' then Mrs. S. spoke on the parable of 
the lost sheep and prayed ; followed by the Christian 
master of the house. Several were there who had not 
heard the gospel before ; one man seemed interested 
and asked questions, and they went on talking long 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 229 

after we had gone to bed. I don't know if I can describe 
our bedroom : it had a mud floor, the partitions were 
partly boards and partly basketwork, the crevices all 
round affording ample ventilation and also opportu- 
nity for any one to inspect us who wished. We had 
a red candle stuck on the most primitive of supports 
to light us ; our bed was somewhat hard, but notwith- 
standing that, and sundry mosquitoes and rats, I 
managed to sleep fairly well, though babies were 
crying and people talking until pretty late. I am 
afraid Mrs. S. did not rest so well. 

" After an early breakfast, and prayers with the 
people, when Mrs. S. spoke from the story of Nico- 
demus, we started to walk here, a distance of about 
twenty-five //, or nine miles, stopping at one village to 
speak to a few people, and again at the house of one 
of the members, where we dined and rested a short 
time, then starting forward again we reached here 
about 12.30. This is a truly Chinese building, nest- 
ling in amongst the hills, apparently in a most out-of- 
the-way spot, but really within convenient distance 
for all the members. We received a hearty welcome 
from the young preacher Ah-chang, his wife (a former 
school-girl), and mother, and another preacher (who is 
partially supported by the Church), and all of whom 
live here ; and at once they began to trace the route 
we should take, for the next three days, so as to reach 
as many of the outlying stations as possible. After a 



230 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

rest, we went out on to the hill for a little quiet read- 
ing before our evening meal, and thoroughly enjoyed 
the beautiful prospect spread out before us ; the river 
on one side, and on the other the plains, filled with 
the rich golden harvest, dotted over with the reapers ; 
and the hills on all sides stretching as far as the eye 
can reach. 

"Saturday, Dong-ling Chapel. After three days' 
travelling we are very glad to find ourselves back here 
again in our own little room over the chapel, and while 
Mrs. S. is resting I will try and tell you what we have 
been doing. We started from here about 8.O a.m. to 
walk to the house of one of the members where we 
were to dine. Our road lay for some distance by the 
river, past fields of sugar-cane and rice. We passed 
several villages where there were Christians, stopping 
now and then to exchange a few words with the 
women ; the men were all busy in the fields cutting 
the corn. Then we crossed the river (by this time 
very low and very muddy) in a dirty ferry-boat, to go 
to the place where we were to dine, in truly Chinese 
style of course, basins of rice and chopsticks. We 
had fried eggs and pork, done up with some kind of 
vegetable. After you have finished a meal they always 
give you some hot water to wash your face and hands, 
and then a basin of tea. 

" I should like to tell you about these people ; the 
house belonged to two brothers, the younger of whom 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 231 

was a gambler, and is now dead ; the elder brother's 
wife came from a Christian home and was converted 
before she was married, and when she went to her 
new home none of the family were Christians, and 
the mother-in-law was bitterly opposed to her, and 
for several years would not allow her to attend the 
services, nor the Christians to visit her. But she, by 
her gentle submissive behaviour, and by speaking 
when she had opportunity, so won them over that her 
husband now regularly attends the services, though 
he has not yet been baptized ; and the old mother has 
ceased to oppose and persecute, though not yet con- 
verted. She received us very graciously. After 
giving the gospel to those who gathered round, we 
started on our way again to the house of this young 
woman's father and mother (where we were to pass 
the night), which we reached about 4 p.m., having 
walked in all, I suppose, about ten miles. After a 
short rest we went up the hillside to visit a poor old 
woman whom Mrs. S. had known some years ago. 
We sat some time enjoying the quiet and the beauties 
around us and stopped to take a drink of the pure 
mountain stream, and to bathe our faces in its clear 
water ; and finally reached the old woman's hut, a 
tiny thatched place, with scarcely room to stand up- 
right in, and light only admitted by the door. The 
old woman (who is eighty years of age) looked doubt- 
ful at sight of a stranger, and then exclaimed, " It is 



232 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Sy-mo ! Ah, my ears are deaf, and my eyes dim, and 
J couldn't see you, and it is so long since you were 
here/ and then she took Mrs. S.'s hand and led her 
in. Poor old thing! she is so deaf, she goes on talking, 
whether others are talking or not ; she cannot hear 
anything that is said, and can scarcely see either ; she 
has heard the gospel many times, but I fear has not 
received it ; if such is the case she is beyond reach of 
it now, for she cannot take in anything. Her son was 
a Christian ; he died quite peacefully last year, after 
only eight days' illness, we were told by his widow, 
who is also a Christian. 

" We came down the hill again to our evening meal, 
a truly Chinese one the usual dish of fat pork, fried 
eggs, and the native potatoes fried in slices. It is 
very nice just at first if one is hungry, but by the 
time I have got through half my basin of rice I feel 
as if I didn't want any more. The two preachers 
who accompanied us made the most of their time 
amongst those who crowded in to see, and by the 
time all were ready for evening prayers a goodly 
number had gathered, and the gospel was once more 
preached, after which we retired to rest. The natives, 
however, went on preaching till late, and began before 
we got up in the morning. The old people are both 
Christians, also their son, who, with his wife and two 
children, live there ; the mother is a dear old woman, 
with such a bright, happy face. 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 233 

" The people are astir at sunrise, so it is impossible 
to sleep much after 5 a.m., and about 8 o'clock we 
were ready to start off again. The first place we 
called at was the home of these people's second 
daughter, whose husband is a Christian ; but she, 
having three children, does not often come to service 
now. The people did not gather there, so we walked 
on, and soon after again crossed the river. On the 
opposite bank was deposited quantities of sand, as far 
as we could see on either side, and for about half a 
mile inland. On inquiry we learned that last year 
this was all cultivated, but the river overflowed and 
left this deposit of sand, thus destroying hundreds of 
Chinese acres, and leaving many people in want. 

" We soon reached quite a large village, where the 
gospel has not yet been preached, and spoke at some 
length to a large concourse of people, who seemed 
interested, and bought books and papers. We then 
passed on to the house of an inquirer in the next 
village, where we dined ; the people there were so 
clamorous and noisy that we could scarcely get our 
meal ; and they seemed almost ready to pull the doors 
down because they could not all see at once. How- 
ever, when they were a little quieted, Mrs. S. and the 
preachers were able to again deliver the message of 
salvation ; but not till at the people's request we had 
adjourned to an idol temple, where, on a platform sur- 
rounded by the most hideous images, the glad tidings 



$34 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

were again proclaimed. We then started again, and 
passing through several places, stopping wherever the 
people seemed disposed to listen, reached the house 
of another inquirer, situated in a lovely corner of the 
valley surrounded by hills, and amidst the most beau- 
tiful vegetation, where we were to pass the night. 
Here the people were quite different, though they also 
had not seen foreigners before; they did not press and 
crowd like the others, and seemed anxious to hear the 
gospel. As soon as we were a little rested we began, 
and when the speakers were all tired out, told them 
to go home and have their evening meal, and if they 
returned they would speak again. They soon came 
back in larger numbers, and sitting outside, for there 
was no room large enough to hold them, Mrs. S. and 
the preachers again gave them the words of Life. 
The people of the house told me I need not come 
out, but I found the people came inside to look at me 
instead of listening ; so I joined the throng, as to sit 
and be looked at was all I could do. Oh ! how I 
longed to be able to speak too, and give them the 
message of salvation ! 

" The preaching went on long after we had gone to 
bed, and quite early in the morning we were asked to 
go to another house for breakfast ; so about 6.30 we 
turned out in the cool, clear morning air, and after a 
short but lovely walk, mostly through bamboo groves, 
we reached the house of another inquirer, where, after 



"IN THE MORtilNG SOW TtiY SEED" 235 

taking our morning meal, the gospel was again 
preached. As we had walked about ten miles each 
day, and they told us to-day's journey would be longer 
than the preceding ones, we arranged to have chairs 
for the first part of the way, and accordingly were 
carried to the first stopping-place, the house of a 
Christian, where we had dinner, though it was only 
eleven o'clock, but we had breakfasted early, so were 
ready for some refreshment ; there also we preached, 
but the people were not very attentive ; and as we were 
anxious to push on, we did not stay very long, but 
started for this place about twelve o'clock, walking this 
time. We stopped at various places on the way, preach- 
ing wherever they were willing to listen, and now and 
then resting in a quiet spot, and reached here about 
3.30, having walked, I suppose, six or seven miles. 

" To-morrow is Communion Sunday here, so several 
of the Christians have already arrived, and others will 
be coming in to-morrow morning. We have just had 
the usual Saturday evening prayer-meeting, and the 
native preacher, Mr. Tsie (whose wife was also a 
school-girl), gave a very nice address on the parable of 
the unmerciful servant. One of his thoughts especially 
struck me ; he said that if the servant had remained 
near his master, after his debt was forgiven, he would 
not have treated his fellow-servant so unkindly ; so if 
we are not continually in communion with Christ, we 
are sure to fall into sin. We have an opportunity 



236 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

to-night of putting in practice the lesson of forgiving 
others ; for the man who was to carry our beds from 
the place where we slept last night has not arrived 
(10 p.m.) ; fortunately, there is a bed here Mrs. S. 
can use, and I am going to console myself with two 
shawls ; but we are minus towels, brush and comb, 
and other necessary etceteras. We suppose he got to 
the river too late to be ferried across ; we are hoping 
he will arrive in time for us to make our toilet in the 
morning. 

" Sunday. This morning we were up pretty early, 
our beds not being particularly inviting as you may 
imagine, and on inquiry found our belongings had 
arrived about dawn ; so were able to make our toilets 
in comfort, very glad to be out of reach of the curious 
eyes which have followed most of our movements for 
the last three days. 

" Very early the Christians began to arrive from all 
directions for the service, and after breakfast it was 
quite interesting to watch the different groups con- 
verging from all sides to the one point ; one party of 
twenty- two we saw just after they had crossed the 
river, and quite a procession they looked as they filed 
along, for the roads are so narrow it is impossible to 
walk two abreast. And so by twos and threes they 
kept on coming till about 10.0, when the service com 
menced, 1 20 to 1 30 having then gathered. Mrs. Stott 
gave them an address on the parable of the ten virgins, 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 237 

and their ready and correct answers to her questions 
showed the attention with which they listened. Some 
earnest words from Mr. Tsie followed, and then the 
communion service, after which their mid-day meal 
was discussed ; each one brings his own rice, and five 
cash to pay for the vegetables, &c., that they eat with 
it ; it is cooked altogether, the Christian families 
taking this duty by turns ; an early afternoon service 
followed, and by four o'clock all had dispersed to 
their homes. 

" Tuesday -, Wenchow. After an early breakfast 
yesterday morning we started about 7.30 to walk 
from the chapel to the canal where we could get a 
boat for Wenchow, a distance of about nine miles. 
Most of the Christians had gone home the day before, 
but there were one or two remaining with whom we 
had prayers before leaving. Many whom we had not 
visited were much disappointed the day before to 
hear that we were leaving so soon, and should not 
have time to get to their homes. But they are so 
scattered it would have taken another week to reach 
them all, and Mrs. S. was anxious to get back here, 
because of the O-dzing affair being not yet settled. 
Part of our way back lay through the same plains by 
which we had come on the previous Wednesday ; but 
about half-way we turned off into a fresh road, and 
grand and beautiful as the former was I think this 
surpassed it. The valleys were narrower and the 



238 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

hills closer to us, and most majestic they looked, and 
their sides were not cultivated, mostly covered with 
young fir-trees. 

" We ascended the Dong-ling hills by a gentle slope 
by the side of which a clear mountain stream leapt 
and sparkled over the stones, now and then falling in 
tiny waterfalls into a deep pool, sometimes close by 
our side, but generally far below in the gorge. We 
rested at the top enjoying the view; the steep descent 
on the other side was soon accomplished, and in a 
very short time we were seated in the little boat en 
route for home, and what a home it looked after the 
dirty, comfortless places we had been in! We found 
Miss B. looking very bright, and all seemed going on 
well. It was nice to see the dear familiar faces again, 
and not feel that every one was staring suspiciously 
at you, and wondering whether you were a man or a 
woman. I was so glad to get back to my girls and 
my regular work again, though I thoroughly enjoyed 
the journey and feel much better for the change. 
Perhaps the next time I go I shall be able to take a 
little share in the work ; the constant speaking must 
be very tiring." 

On our return from this journey we found quite a 
string of events had happened during our absence. 
One poor woman had died ; three preachers were too 
ill to take the usual Sunday services, but unexpectedly 
one of the Bing-yie men came in and filled the gap ; 



"IN THE MORNING SOW THY SEED" 239 

how faithful our God is in every hour of need ! " Boast 
not thyself of to-morrow, for thou knowest not what 
a day may bring forth." I had hardly sent off a letter 
to a friend, boasting that I was so strong, " fit for any 
amount of work," &c., &c., when I was laid aside with 
an attack of the famous influenza, which had at last 
reached this out-of-the-way corner of the earth. I 
was ill a week, and never remember being so weakened 
in so short a time, and we heard it was much worse 
in Shang-hai and Ning-po. So my next country trip 
had to be curtailed to a short visit of three days, as it 
was a new district, and the people were very rough 
and the crowds so great, that several times we were 
unable to speak on account of the noise. There are 
"tens" of villages comparatively near where the 
gospel had not been preached ; my heart is often 
weary thinking of this, and yet we do all we 
can. When will the day come when every town, 
village, city, and hamlet, shall have its witness for 
Christ? 

The Lord never lets me want anything that is for 
my good ; when I am in need He always supplies 
that either, or something else which does as well. In 
looking over my accounts at the end of this year 1890, 
there was a small deficit in almost every branch of our 
work. I took the matter to the Lord, and the very 
last steamer of the year brought me gifts from two 
friends not only enough, but a balance to begin the 



2 4 o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

new year with, and open an account for the boys we 
hope to train. " Bless the Lord, O my soul," I can 
say. " Goodness and mercy have followed me all the 
days of my life." 



CHAPTER XVII 

Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy." 
JOHN xvi. 20. 



year opened with dark clouds. Perhaps a 
J- letter written at the time will give the best idea 
of our position : "The last few months have been 
filled up with joy and sorrow, loss and gain have held 
an almost even hand. The year opened with the 
death of one of our best and most efficient evangelists. 
He was brought to the Lord ten years ago, and for 
eight years has preached far and wide the gospel of 
God's grace. Supported by the native church, he 
laboured first in Dong-ling and latterly in Tung-t'so 
district. In the former place he was much used of 
the Lord, and often adopted a rather novel way of 
gaining a hearing. He would choose his position, 
and then with a voice enough to frighten any civilised 
mortal would begin to sing a hymn. The tune 
attempted was generally ' Old Hundred,' but it 
ought to have been called * Martyrdom/ for no one 
who ever knew that grand old tune would have recog- 

17 241 



S 4 2 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

nised it. The people would flock out to hear the 
strange sound, and when the crowd was large enough 
to suit his purpose he would begin to preach. Well 
do I remember him telling us he had adopted this 
plan, and with a beaming face, he added, * I caught 
four that day ' ; he was a veritable fisher of men. 
One thing was noticeable, those whom he instructed 
were wonderfully clear in the plan of salvation, and 
were able to answer any questions about the death 
and resurrection of Christ. Quite a munber have been 
brought to the Lord through his instrumentality, 
especially in the district of Tung-t'so, where not only 
a few men and women were converted, but five or six 
bright young lads of ages varying from fourteen to 
nineteen. Although they could not read a character, 
they learned from him a wonderful number of texts 
and hymns ; indeed, their ability to learn was so 
marked that I have been induced to bring them into 
the city for two years' education and Bible training 
in the hope that by and by they will become useful 
preachers. 

"Two weeks before his death Mr. Poe came into the 
city to spend communion Sunday with us ; and at the 
end of the service, with much earnestness, he told the 
church members they must come to his help. On every 
hand were open doors, and as it was impossible for him 
to enter them all, would not some one volunteer to 
come ? On the 1 5th of January, 1 89 1 , he came from his 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 243 

station suffering from bronchitis, but did not seem 
dangerously ill. He called his son, and told him 
he must go and take his place, as the work could not 
be left. The son asked that he might wait a few 
days, and nurse his father. He answered, ' No ; souls 
are important ; I am all right, my younger sons are 
here who will look after me ; you go at once and do 
the Lord's work.' The next day the son started at 
his bidding, and only a few hours afterwards the 
younger son, seeing a change in his face, said, 
1 Father, is the Lord calling you ? ' He answered, 
'Yes, the Lord is calling me. I shall soon be at 
home. You have not been earnest enough ; you 
must cleave closer to the Lord/ Then, after a pause, 
he said, ' Sing a hymn/ and at the close of the hymn 
our brother entered into the presence of his Saviour. 
" Two weeks later our only other paid evangelist 
had to be put away for sin. These were heavy blows, 
and at first we did not know how their places were to 
be supplied. I had during the last year formed a 
band of unpaid preachers. They were seven in 
number, and went out every Saturday afternoon 
and held services in as many districts, and 550 
cash (about is. 3d.) per month was given them as 
travelling expenses. To this band we naturally 
looked to supply the two vacant places. The native 
church had to select the one paid by them, and the 
choice of another -fell upon me. Two of the most 



244 MISSION WORK /AT CHINA 

earnest were chosen, and on the same day two more 
joined our unpaid band ; thus in the midst of trial 
we were greatly cheered. 

"The work amongst the women has been most 
encouraging. During the year the numbers have 
increased so much that we have had to enlarge the 
meeting-room, and they have began a little evange- 
listic work on their own account. A few of our 
Christian women who live outside the South Gate 
and are surrounded by quite a number of little ham- 
lets, meet for prayer every Wednesday afternoon, and 
the outcome of the prayer-meeting has been that they 
have appointed one of their number, in turn, to go out 
one day a week to preach the gospel to the women of 
these hamlets, the others joining in paying her boat 
expenses ; this is besides contributing to the support 
of their Bible-woman, and was quite a little plan 
of their own, which I did not even know of until aH 
the arrangements were made. At the beginning of 
the Chinese New Year I asked for a few who would 
undertake to visit sick and absent members, and 
the response was so cordial that I was able to appoint 
two for each month of the year, whose duty it was to 
visit all the sick and absentees. We have had quite 
a remarkable case just lately, which I think worth 
mentioning. 

" During the autumn a good deal of my time was 
spent in visiting the Christians in their village homes, 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 245 

and on one of these visits I was much distressed by the 
extent and spiritual destitution ofYung-ko-dgiae. We 
have about ten members in that district. I was told 
that of the 108 villages, perhaps not more than a dozen 
had had an offer of salvation. On my return I asked 
my native sisters to pray about this place, and after a 
few weeks sent two evangelists to spend ten days 
and preach in as many villages as they could in that 
time. In one of those places they were told to go 
to the house of a woman who seemed to know some- 
thing about their gospel. They went, and on talking 
with her found she answered like one who had known 
the truth for years. The preacher asked her how she 
knew these things, seeing she had never met with 
Christians ? She told them that a Bu-sa (spirit) came 
and told her many things during the night. This 
Bu-sa, she said, was clad in white garments, and told 
her she must give up worshipping the idols, break her 
vegetarian vow (as there was no merit in that), cut off 
her opium-smoking, and put on white garments ; and 
that he would send her a teacher who would tell her 
how she was to be saved. 

" She told the preacher to come again, and if this 
doctrine was indeed the true one, the Bu-sa would 
tell her that night. He left a small book and a 
Gospel of John. She had already given up vege- 
tarianism, had put on white underclothing, and given 
up opium for a fortnight ; but her son, fearing his 



246 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

mother was going mad, had brought the pipe again, 
and pleaded with her to resume the drug. The son, 
who seems very fond of his mother, fearing the effect 
of a foreign religion, took away her book, and, going 
to the house of one of the Christians, gave it to him, 
telling him not to let any one from Wenchow visit 
his mother, as he did not wish her to have anything 
to do with the religion of Jesus. On the preacher's 
second visit she seemed much distressed; she said the 
Bu-sa had again spoken to her, and said she had done 
wrong in giving up the book (she could read fairly 
well, and was in easy circumstances), and that she 
must go to Wenchow and see the foreign lady teacher, 
who would pray for her. When she announced her 
determination to come and see me, her son was 
greatly distressed, but feared to oppose her. She 
arrived on a Saturday afternoon, and I had a long 
talk with her, and was much struck with her intel- 
ligent understanding of the Scriptures, which she had 
been reading. She said God had given her a new 
name. 

"After Sunday, I told her that if she was willing to 
cut off her opium, and stay with me for two weeks or 
so, I would help her. She asked for time to think it 
over, and after dinner, very tremblingly, brought me 
her opium-tray. Poor thing, I knew she had entered 
on a hard struggle, for she had been smoking for ten 
years, but the native Christians, as well as ourselves, 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 247 

were much in prayer for her, and we expected victory. 

I had told her to come to our rooms whenever she 

felt bad, and we would play and sing and pray with 

her. She bore up until almost two in the morning, 

when they called me : she was then so ill that I 

allowed her to have a little of the drug. The next 

day, about three in the afternoon, being again very ill, 

I sat by her a long time, rubbing the twitching limbs, 

soothing and helping her all I could. In the evening 

I gave her a morphine powder, which quieted her for 

the rest of the night. Thus she continued for three 

more days, until the suffering had almost gone, and 

we looked for a happy issue, when there came a letter 

from her brother and son, urging her to come home, 

and not to give up the opium. I tried to encourage 

her to remain with us another week, but the next 

morning she decided she must go home. She could 

stand the terrible craving no longer, and she feared 

the disease, for which she took the opium in the first 

instance, was returning. With a heavy heart we had 

to let her go : it seemed grievous that just as she was 

escaping from the power of that terrible vice, she 

should slip back again, for we knew going home 

meant going back to it. She has been visited since, 

but while professing to trust the Lord for salvation, 

she keeps to her pipe. One could weep for the sorrow 

of those who are held fast in this dreadful bondage. 

Thank God, the prey is often snatched from the 



248 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

mighty, and we have not a few saved and delivered 
from the power of the devil. 

"One dear woman, hearing of the gospel from her 
neighbours, and knowing that salvation and her 
opium-pipe could not go together, determined to give 
up the latter. She bought some opium medicine, and 
time after time as the craving came upon her, she 
prayed and continued the struggle until she got the 
victory. She has been a consistent Christian for 
nearly two years. Both her daughter and son-in-law 
were opium-smokers, and through her influence the 
latter gave up the pipe, but took to drinking instead. 
Do we not find in many cases, such as this woman's, 
that the old gospel has not lost any of its power; but 
oh ! shall we not pray and never rest until this demon 
be swept from the land, as far as the traffic with 
England is concerned ? Alas, for poor China ! One's 
heart sinks when one thinks of her sorrow." 

During this summer we had a rather amusing epi- 
sode which frightened half the city, but, nevertheless, 
was used of God to the conversion of several of the 
school-girls. We were in our sitting-room, soon after 
prayers one evening, one reading aloud, the rest work- 
ing, when suddenly we heard a cry of terror, " Sz-mo ! 
Sz-mo ! " We rushed out, wondering what could have 
happened, and running upstairs from whence the 
sounds came, our cook gasped out, " Look, look at the 
heavens ! " Looking in the direction indicated, I saw 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 249 

a very bright reflection of an electric light, but where 
it proceeded from we did not know. The school-girls 
had fallen on their knees, and were praying in much 
fear. I explained the phenomena, and heard one of 
the servants say, with a sigh of relief, " I thought the 
day of the Lord had come." The next morning we 
heard that an English gunboat had come up the river, 
and so the mystery was solved. Several of the girls 
had become truly anxious, and the question was 
pressed home, "What it the Lord had come? we 
are not ready." 

The Sunday following, just as we were retiring for 
the night, we heard the girls talking rather excitedly. 
Miss B. called to them to be quiet and go to bed, but 
they answered, "We can't be quiet, our hearts are 
so full, three souls have been saved to-night. Tell 
Sz-mo to thank God with us." After hearing who 
the three were, we knelt down and gave God thanks. 
The next morning before six o'clock we heard them 
all singing together, " Happy day when Jesus washed 
my sins away." After morning prayers I took them, 
one by one, into my study, and heard their simple 
story. One child was seen weeping, and when asked 
what was the matter she replied, " I am a great sinner." 
Two others were anxious, and they were led by the 
elder girls, who had been lately much revived in 
soul, to the Saviour, in whom they found peace and 
pardon. The following Thursday, at our usual meet- 



250 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

ing, I told the good news to our dear praying women, 
and asked them, while giving thanks for this, to re- 
member the two elder girls, still unsaved. It was not 
often I took evening prayers in the school then, but 
on this occasion I did, and one of the two prayed for 
that afternoon was saved ; and two days later another, 
and as far as we could see they were real cases. Two 
of the five were the most naughty-tempered girls we 
had, so the change in them was most marked. 

September $th. Saturday was a busy day. All 
the afternoon and evening we were examining candi- 
dates for baptism. I spoke with each one in my study 
first, and in the evening they were again examined in 
the presence of one hundred or more members. Ten 
out of twelve were accepted and baptized next day. 
That Sunday was such a happy one. The morning 
service lasted three hours and twenty minutes, yet no 
one seemed tired. After the usual service and break- 
ing of bread, the silversmith told how the Lord 
was blessing his work at Bah-zie (three of the new 
converts were the fruit of his labours), and of their 
need of a chapel. He told how much money he had 
received, and how much he still needed. The mem- 
bers responded nobly, and at once promised to 
contribute twenty-seven dollars (about $), and this 
just after they had given the usual sum for one of 
their own evangelists. Later on other promises were 
added, so that altogether, including his own donation, 



< SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 251 

he received fifty-five dollars from the native Christians 
alone. 

But it was not long before our joy was turned to 
sorrow sickness and death were to be again our 
portion. That very Sunday, Sept. 6th, I had a letter, 
written by Mrs. G., saying she was ill, and, if no 
better, would like to .come into Wenchow to see the 
doctor. I wrote at once, telling her to come anyhow, 
little thinking she was so seriously ill. They were to 
arrive on Wednesday, early ; and on Tuesday after- 
noon Miss W. with Miss T., who had only recently 
joined us, went for their usual walk on the hill. Soon 
after a man . came running in to tell us that one of 
the young ladies had fallen from the city wall to the 
street below, a distance of twenty feet. In a few 
minutes she was carried in, and Dr. L. kindly came 
at once to attend to her. The elbow of the right arm 
was literally smashed, but the doctor dressed it as 
well as he could ; and the next morning, at 6 a.m., 
the G.'s arrived. I now quote Miss B.'s letter, written 
at the time : 

"On Saturday, the 5th, the country Christians came 
in to be ready for the services, and amongst them 
were twelve candidates for baptism four women and 
eight men. Mrs. Stott and the pastor saw them all 
in the afternoon, and had a talk with each one. I 
was present and much enjoyed the answers of some ; 
they were so clear and bright. Two were asked to 



252 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

wait a few months longer, as they do not yet under- 
stand much ; and the other ten were examined after 
the prayer-meeting in the evening, in the presence of 
about one hundred of the members. One of the 
unpaid preachers gave a nice testimony as to the 
reality of one woman's faith, saying that before she 
believed the doctrine she was in debt, but as soon as 
she became a Christian she set herself to pay her 
debts, and is now quite free. The next morning, at 
nine o'clock, the baptisms took place. Three of the 
people were from a new place, Bah'-zie, where a good 
work is going on, entirely through the efforts of one 
man, Ao-ming by name, a silversmith. About the 
beginning of last year he, with his wife, removed 
there from Wenchow, and at once opened a room for 
preaching. He has had services regularly ever since, 
paying all expenses connected with the work ; and 
now there are quite a number of inquirers ; and these 
three have been received into church fellowship. 
After the baptisms the collection was taken (the 
church supports the evangelist for the Tung-ts'6 
district), then the service, at the end of which we 
remembered the Lord's death for us. 

" Then Ao-ming asked to say a few words. He re- 
minded the people of the time when Mr. Stott had 
come to their city, when the name of God had never 
been heard, and of how he toiled and preached the 
gospel all around, and of the result to-day. They 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOY" 253 

had received all freely, the chapel in which they were 
sitting never costing them a dollar ; and compared 
them to a vine which took root on Mr. Stott's arrival, 
the branches having spread into the districts around, 
the last branch being Bah-zie, where he is. He told 
now the Lord had blessed him, how the room he had 
rented could not hold the people who gathered, and 
that the few who had believed could not mortgage 
a larger one, so he looked to them as the parent to 
provide for the baby just born. The response was a 
noble one, twenty-seven dollars being given or pro- 
mised on the spot. Altogether, from the Wenchow 
church, including his own donation, he has received 
fifty-four or fifty-five dollars. This from the native 
Christians alone. 

" On reaching the house we found we had had a 
service of three hours and a quarter, not counting the 
prayer-meeting the Christians always have before we 
come in. There was only time to get dinner when 
the preachers met for their monthly meeting. They 
report any interesting cases, and sometimes their 
districts are changed, then they have prayer, immedi- 
ately after that all gathered into their respective classes 
for the afternoon meetings, and those ended, many of 
the Christians returned home ; thus ended a happy 
and full day of service for the Lord. 

"October i^th. I had written part of the above, 
hoping to post it at once, when we were suddenly 



254 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

plunged into sorrow by sickness and death, and I 
have been too much engaged in the sick-room to 
finish before this. On Tuesday, September 8th, Miss 
Tanner fell from the city wall a distance of twenty 
feet into the street below, breaking her elbow bone 
into pieces and receiving very severe bruising all down 
the right side. The next morning at six o'clock Mr. 
and Mrs. G. with their little girl came in from Bing-yie, 
Mrs. G. being very ill with dysentery. Dr. Lowry, 
who was exceedingly kind, said at once hers was a 
most serious case; he feared she would not pull 
through. We did all we could for her, but she 
gradually sank, and on Thursday at 5.5 p.m. she 
entered into the presence of the Lord Jesus only 
thirty-six hours after being carried in. She was so 
sure she would recover, and several times thanked the 
Lord for the life spared, praying so earnestly that she 
might live more entirely to God's glory. Though un- 
conscious on Thursday, she would always answer any 
question ; she spent a good deal of the day in prayer. 
She prayed very earnestly about workers in Bing-yie. 
She thought she was in Shang-hai with Mr. Taylor, 
and again and again asked that the matter might be 
settled that afternoon. Once she said, 'Now, dear 
Mr. Taylor, will you pray?' About noon I repeated 
a text Miss Tanner sent her; she did not grasp the 
meaning, and I said, ' That means Jesus.' ' Oh, does 
it?' she replied; 'then that means everything, does it 



"SORROW SHALL BE TtfRNED INTO JOK" 255 

not?' She at once closed her eyes and prayed so 
beautifully; I will give what I remember of the prayer 
in her own words : ' O Lord, we come to Thee this 
afternoon in that precious, precious name of Jesus; 
we little know the meaning of that name, and of what 
we could do with it if we only used it. ... Let us 
begin from to-day and start afresh in the power of 
that name . . . that we may live in it, act in it, 
move in it, and work in the power of that precious, 
precious name. . . .' Her one theme was Jesus, 
' that precious, precious name/ as she said again and 
again. Once she turned to Mrs. Stott, saying, * What 
do you think the Lord Jesus wants me to do for Him 
now?' and on Mrs. S. saying, C I think perhaps He 
wants to call you home,' she said, ' Oh, do you think 
so; that would be lovely, if only I could think that.' 

" I don't think she realised she was going, she had 
been so sure she would get better. Very soon after 
that she became quite unconscious and unable to 
speak. We buried her the next day in the little 
cemetery outside the city walls, near the little 
baby boy she lost last year, and near dear Miss 
Boyd who was taken from us last year, in sure and 
certain hope of a glorious resurrection. ' A little while 
and He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.' 
A week later Mr. G. and his little three-year-old 
motherless child went to Shang-hai, and last mail we 
were terribly shocked and grieved to hear that little 



256 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Olive had died, after three days' illness, from cholera 
It does seem too terrible, and as yet we can hardly 
realise it. Truly 'God's ways are not as our ways, nor 
God's thoughts as our thoughts.' The 'love that 
spared not His own son ' hath done this; we can only 
bow the head and say, ' It is the Lord; let Him do as 
seemeth Him good.' May the God of all comfort 
comfort and sustain His tried and sorrowing servant, 
for only He who has so bruised can heal. 

" To return to Miss T., whom we left very much 
shaken and bruised : she has had a trying time, the 
arm could not have splints on as the wounds were 
very bad, and the whole arm much swollen; for a 
month she caused us anxiety, as we feared the spine 
was also injured; the fever was very high, but she 
has been getting up a little the last few days, and 
we trust she will now go steadily forward. She 
needed constant attention day and night for several 
weeks. All who have seen the place where she fell 
marvel she was not killed. We do sincerely praise 
God that so little injury was done, and for all the 
grace and patience He has given her. 

"On October 4th we had eleven more baptisms; 
five were school-girls, four of whom were converted 
four months ago, and who have shown decidedly by 
their changed lives that they are 'new creatures in 
Christ Jesus.' One, an old man of seventy-seven years 
from O-dzing, gave a very clear testimony I was 



"SORROW SHALL BE TURNED INTO JOK" 257 

much struck with the way in which he spoke of the 
1 precious blood.' One of the questions was, * Have 
you any part in hell?' He replied ' No; I once had, 
but now I have part in heaven.' ' How has that come 
about?' was the next question. His face lighted up, 
and in his energy he threw out both hands and almost 
shouted * By the precious blood !' There was another 
man from Bah-zie, Ao-ming's place, making four now 
in that village, not counting Ao-ming and his wife; 
the rest were from Wenchow and its outskirts. Thus 
twenty-one have been received during the last two 
months. 

"The following Tuesday the preachers' meeting 
took place; we had a good day, and the Lord was 
present in the power of the Holy Ghost. The pastor, 
Mr. Tsiu, took the morning meeting, speaking with 
power, and the prayers after were very earnest. For 
six weeks we nursed Miss T. night and day, at the 
end of which the doctor advised her to go to Shang- 
hai for further medical advice, and after lingering 
there for nearly two months, she fell asleep in Jesus." 



18 



CHAPTER XVIII 

" All Thy works shall praise Thee, O Lord ; and Thy saints shall bless 
Thee." PSA. cxlv. 10. 

IN November of this year I paid my first visit to 
O-dzing and give the following account written 
at the time: 

" Our visit to this place is never to be forgotten, 
the journey being one of unsurpassed beauty. In vain 
may I attempt to give you some idea of its grandeur. 
You must imagine yourself in a district surrounded 
by high mountains. The journey, occupying the 
greater part of two days, lay entirely amongst the 
mountains, the path winding along and often through 
a stream of clear, limpid waters, rushing in ceaseless 
music under and over great boulders which had fallen 
from the cliffs above in years gone by. In passing 
through these streams one has to hold one's breath ; 
the chair-bearers are nearly knee deep, and a false 
step would give one an unseasonable bath with, per- 
haps, more serious results. The mountains are not 
rugged and bare, like those you are accustomed to in 

25* 



"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE" 259 

your more northern clime, but ridge after ridge high 
up the sides is cultivated, and only a few weeks ago 
the rich, ripe harvest was safely gathered in. On the 
higher and more precipitous mountains there is a 
perfect glory of dark fir, lighted up here and there by 
clusters of the light-green graceful bamboo. Along 
the foot of the hills and hedges the wild tea and bi-bo 
trees are in full bloom, the latter scenting the air with 
its delicious fragrance ; the bright yellow flowers, some 
resembling the broom, others the daisy in form, give 
quite a glory to the scene; while here and there a 
scarlet azalea seems to have forgotten we are in the 
middle of November. Ferns of great variety are in 
abundance, while every now and again we come upon 
a splendid waterfall, whose white, foaming waters rush 
headlong down, regardless of all below. 

"Altogether, it was a scene to inspire the com- 
monest mind and send the poet and the painter into 
raptures. Yet in the midst of all this beauty, poverty 
and filth, sin and misery abound. Our hearts were 
drawn out in deep gratitude to God that in this 
remote mountainous region with its widely scattered 
villages the gospel of His grace was known and loved 
by not a few. 

" The little church here has been baptized by fire ; 
some of the members have suffered much for Christ's 
sake, yet they have come out of the fire stronger and 
better for the testing. God grant that the little seed 



2<5o MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

may grow into a strong tree, with branches spreading 
to all around. 

" Tuesday t \*jth. We t.e. Miss Bardsley, the evan- 
gelist, our cook and myself left Wenchow about ten 
o'clock on Wednesday evening (nth), and ought to 
have reached the end of our water journey by dawn 
next morning, but strong head-winds and opium- 
smoking boatmen defeated our purpose, so at dawn 
we were only seven miles from the city. We managed 
to get chair-bearers, however, and started at 9 a.m., 
intending to make one-half of the journey that day. 
At two o'clock we reached the house of an inquirer, 
who gave us a hearty invitation to spend the night 
there and to preach to the villagers. This we con- 
sented to do, though we were more than an hour's ride 
from the place we had intended to stay at. We were 
hardly seated before a curious crowd gathered around 
us, for foreign women had never been in that district 
before. I tried once or twice to speak to them, but 
their excitement was too great, they would not hear; 
so I told them to go home, get their suppers, put 
their babies to bed, and return later. We gave the 
invitation, but were hardly prepared for the response; 
for scarcely had we finished our tea, when a large 
crowd assembled of men, women, and children. The 
room was dangerously full, the people standing so 
closely that they swayed to and fro in the most 
alarming manner; the lights were dim and those on 



"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE" 261 

the outer rim were struggling to get a sight of us; the 
noise was deafening; three times I essayed to get a 
hearing, but at last determined to retire, hoping that 
the preacher would get a quiet opportunity of telling 
them of a Saviour's love. On reaching our room we 
found it necessary to put out the light at once, as the 
women were following; we listened with beating hearts 
to the noise below, as the preacher in vain tried to get 
a hearing. In an hour or two all was quiet, but not 
before they had brought lighted torches and, inserting 
them through the partition, at last persuaded them- 
selves we were really in bed and asleep. The next 
morning before starting we had a very quiet and 
orderly service. 

" Six and a half hours' further riding brought us to 
our journey's end, and then what a welcome awaited 
us ! The Christians had somehow heard of our 
coming, and came out part of the way to meet us, 
their faces beaming with delight. We were at once 
taken upstairs to the room they had set apart as a 
chapel, and indeed we were delighted with what we 
saw: a table at one end, three rows of stools to accom- 
modate forty-five persons, while on the walls hung 
scrolls of scripture, the whole of the first chapter of 
John, the Sermon on the Mount, and other scriptures. 
It was indeed a refreshing sight, in the place where 
last year the devil seemed to have it all his own way. 

"We have had quite a splendid time here; quiet 



262 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Bible readings, morning and evening, attended by 
thirty or more people. The three services on Sunday 
were as quiet and orderly as any I have seen in 
China. One blind man was proposed for fellowship ; 
the Christians all gave testimony as to his changed 
life, and as his faith in Christ seemed clear and bright, 
he was unanimously received, and to-day he has been 
baptized in the clear mountain stream near by. 

" Yesterday we went to visit a place seven miles off, 
where an interest in the gospel has lately sprung up. 
The youngest son of the family we are living with 
and an earnest Christian woman go there every 
Sunday to preach to them. We were rejoiced to find 
seven or eight persons interested in the truth. On 
arriving there, however, a bitter disappointment 
awaited these Christian workers. One old woman, 
eighty-one years of age, in whose house the services 
were held, had suddenly gone back to her idols, and 
refused to let them have her house for services any 
longer. The reason was that her eldest son, who had 
been away from her for two years, had just returned 
home, and being angry with his mother for receiving 
what he called a foreign religion, she gave all up to 
please him. Poor old thing ! it seemed so sad to see 
her bordering on the grave, yet careless of her soul's 
salvation. Another family, almost next door, offered 
their house, so the meetings were not to be given up. 
I have no doubt but that the gospel will spread in 



"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE" 263 

the district, and many shall yet bow down to own our 
Lord and Saviour. 

"This afternoon we have had rather a novel experi- 
ence. We were invited to visit the wife of the chief 
persecutor of last year, the man who seemed possessed 
by the evil one, and who determined to keep Christi- 
anity out of the place. Of course we were delighted 
to have the opportunity, and were received most 
graciously, old grievances were spoken of but without 
bitterness. The old lady seemed so pleased to see 
us ; she stroked our hands, and gave us tea and nuts, 
and led us to the hills to see the beauties of the place. 
We have no doubt that our visit will result in good, 
in bringing about a kindlier feeling towards the poor 
and despised Christians. We have been freely wel- 
comed in every home. 

" Wenchow, Nov. 2ist. The evening before we left 
we had the first Christian wedding that has ever been 
in that place, and a very rough, noisy time we had ; 
all the village turned out, and there must have been 
one hundred persons to see us eat the wedding 
feast. 

"Next day, 1 8th, we started for home about i p.m., 
halting for the night at a village half-way. In the 
evening we had a large audience of folk anxious to 
see and hear the foreigner. We managed to get 
quiet enough to deliver our message. Next morning 
before seven o'clock we were on the road again, 



264 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

reaching home about 5 p.m. Oh, it was good to get 
into our comfortable home and to find that all had 
gone on well during our absence. Will you pray 
that the work at O-dzing may prosper more and 
more ? 

" Next month we expect all our preachers (two paid 
and eleven unpaid) in for a month's Bible study. I 
have promised to give them a daily Bible lesson in 
Old Testament history. We feel the great need of 
having all our Christians, especially the preachers, 
well taught in the Word that is able to make them 
wise teachers of others." 

Through the kindness of friends in Malvern and 
Dartmouth, we were able to give a Christmas-tree 
not only to the boys and girls, but also extended our 
invitation to a number of our men and women. This 
was not the first time we had dressed a tree, but it 
had been rather sorry work before, spending what 
little money we could spare on useful and pretty 
gifts, there was no little ingenuity required to make 
the thing a success. This year all was changed, and 
never had we seen such lovely dolls or pretty toys, 
all fitted to instruct as well as amuse our young folk, 
and the opening of the box was nearly as great an 
excitement to us as to the natives. The kind friends 
had put in personal gifts for each of us ; these we kept 
until Christmas morning, which added greatly to the 
interchange of presents which we have always kept 



"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE" 265 

up on that day. Our riches made us bold, and we 
invited all the foreign community (which has never 
numbered more than twenty, including missionaries) 
to join in our fun. Some willingly responded, and 
much enjoyed witnessing the happy scene. After 
the children were supplied we had gifts enough to 
put into a good-sized bag, into which the women 
were allowed to dip and become the happy possessor 
of whatever they drew out. 

The last day of the year was spent partly in prayer, 
ending in a watch-night service, a delighful home 
custom which we have always kept up. 



CHAPTER XIX 

1892. 
" The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." LUKE x. 9. 

IN February I was much impressed with the 
favourable opportunity which the first month of 
the Chinese year (February) presented for gospel 
work, and when our preachers assembled for their 
month's study I communicated my thought to them. 
They all gladly responded to the suggestion, that 
they should go two and two into as many towns and 
villages as possible in the time, and preach. Plans 
were made, districts divided up, and twelve men 
started on their mission. I gave each man three 
dollars (above seven shillings and sixpence) for this 
month's expenses, and they all had without exception 
interested audiences in the different districts they 
visited, and in one place permanent work has been 
maintained since. One of the preachers felt unable 
to give up his work for that month, explaining that, 
though his food was provided, there was nothing to 
leave for his wife, so our men contributed amongst 



266 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 267 

themselves enough rice to send to his family rather 
than that he should be deprived of this opportunity. 
Of course, they all returned to their employments at 
the end of the month. 

At the same time, we held evangelistic services in 
the city chapel, using the little organ as a special 
attraction, and we had large numbers at all the 
meetings. A few of the Christian women also went 
out evangelising. Some months afterwards Mrs. Liu 
visited one place where they had been, and found four 
families deeply interested. She returned with a 
splendid report, and brought with her a young wife, 
nineteen years of age, whose husband wished her to 
learn the truths he had himself accepted. She spent 
a fortnight with us, made good progress, and seemed 
really in earnest. I quote from a letter written in 
June regarding this young woman : 

" Two weeks ago we had the joy of receiving her 
husband, twenty-five years of age, and his brother, a 
young man of twenty-two. They were both baptized 
together, the firstfruits of these women's efforts. Now 
they ask that a preacher be sent to them every 
Sunday, and just as the request came to me, another 
of our men offered himself as an unpaid preacher ; so 
the open door was entered. Do praise God with me 
for all this mercy." 

We had also encouragement in the more distant 
places. In one village the preacher was detained 



268 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

three weeks, six families wishing to be taught, and 
one of the inquirers came to the city to purchase 
Bibles and hymn-books. The young wife was 
baptized a few months later. Thus the seed then 
sown brought forth lasting fruit. 

In the spring we had the pleasure of welcoming 
Miss Chalmers. She was engaged to Mr. Menzies, 
who the month previously had reinforced Mr. G. at 
Bing-yie. She remained with us for two years, 
learning the language, at the end of which time she 
was married, and joined her husband in his work 
there. We much missed her loving sympathy and 
hearty interest, though unable to take part in the 
work. 

In the summer Miss Bardsley and I took a much- 
needed change to Japan, leaving the work in the 
hands of the native pastor, and the schools under the 
care of Misses Whitford and Chalmers. I append 
Miss B.'s letter, giving an account of our doings and 
places visited, also one of my own, written on our 
return to Wenchow : 

" ARIMA, near KOBE. 

"We left Wenchow on Aug. 2ist, reached Ning-po 
on Monday, spent there some hours visiting friends. 
In the afternoon sailed for Shang-hai, arriving there 
the following morning. Found all our friends at the 
mission-house well. Only the residents were there. 



" THE KINGDOM OF GOD " 269 

Spent a very busy three days shopping and visiting. 
It is a real treat being able to shop once more, for 
in Wenchow all is done by the servants. On Friday 
went on board the s.s. Yokohama Maru for Japan, a fine 
big steamer, beautifully fitted up. We had a delight- 
ful passage the sea as calm as a mill-pond all the 
way, and the weather so warm that we wore muslin 
dresses even in the open sea. Our fellow-passengers 
were nice, pleasant people, several being missionaries. 
Dr. S., of Shang-hai, has been our companion all the 
way. She is an American, and we are greatly en- 
joying her society. We have been in the midst of 
Americans since we left China. 

" We reached Nagasaki Sunday morning. The 
entrance to the bay is charming, and the bay itself 
is one of the six finest in the world. Surrounded 
by hills, you wonder how or where you came in 
there seems no entrance. The English houses 
nestling among the trees on the sides of the hills, 
make it very pretty and gay with the various flags 
of the Consulates. There were numbers of steamers, 
men-of-war belonging to England, Germany, 
America, and Japan. We were very pleased to see 
our old friend, H.M.S. Redpole come in soon after 
us and anchor close by. The following morning two 
of the men came to see us. They told us six of 
them had been converted in Chin-Kiang through one 
of our missionaries soon after they left Wenchow 



270 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

(you may remember we had the men to tea twice 
and at that time there were no Christians on board). 
They were so bright and full of praise ; it was sweet 
to hear them speak of the keeping power of Christ, 
and its reality. They have much to endure on 
board. In the afternoon the captain, doctor, and 
second lieutenant came to see us. They were going 
to England in a few months, so we may not meet 
again. 

" We had intended calling on some of the mission- 
aries in Nagasaki ; but the weather was so hot we 
contented ourselves with going to church in the 
morning and a visit to the bazaars on Monday 
morning to get some tortoise-shell hairpins, for which 
Nagasaki is famed. On our return we hope to see a 
little of the work, &c. 

"We left Nagasaki on Monday, and again went 
into the open sea for some hours, but the next day 
the scenery was lovely. We passed between islands 
all the way. Sometimes we seemed completely land- 
locked. 

" Wednesday morning early we reached Kobe, and 
at once proceeded to Mrs. Ballard's, whose house is 
in a lovely situation on the hill overlooking the town 
and bay. She had kindly reserved her best room for 
us, and we were quite sorry to leave again, so soon, 
but the weather was so hot we thought it best to 
come on here. We started for this place at 5.30 next 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 271 

morning, and had the pleasure of travelling a few 
miles by train ; then we got kangos for the rest of 
the way. A kango is a short chair, with a cover of 
bamboo ; the proper way is to sit with your legs 
under you, but if you cannot manage that, you must 
manage to stow them away somewhere, for the chair 
is so short. We were four hours and a half on the 
way. The country was very pretty, and we ascended 
the mountains for three hours and a half, then 
descended for one hour. Arima lies in a very narrow 
valley and is completely surrounded by hills ; it is a 
lovely place, and abounds in flowers and ferns of 
every description. 

" We are staying in a Japanese hotel, which is so 
quaint and clean, so different from a Chinese inn. 
Dr. S. is with us. We have two good large rooms, 
for which with baths (real mountain water), good 
food, and attendance, we pay one dollar a day, or two 
shillings and eightpence in English money. The food 
is very good, and they give us more courses than we 
care for. One girl speaks a few words of English, 
and we have great fun making ourselves understood. 
She is very anxious to tell us the Japanese of all we 
say, and we cause great delight when we remember 
to ask for what we want in Japanese. The people 
are so very clean and polite ; they are lively, and 
laugh heartily with us over things. There have been 
and are still a good many missionaries here. 



272 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" Monday. We had such a happy and refreshing 
day yesterday. Mr. P., from China, took morning 
service and gave a beautiful address on Psa. li. 10-13. 
I. The necessity of regeneration. 2. Upholding of 
the Spirit. 3. Maintaining the joy of salvation for 
purposes of service, not for selfish enjoyment. At 
4.30 we all met together to remember the Lord's 
death, and had a very precious season, the Lord's 
presence being very manifest. At 7.30 there was an 
open meeting and much prayer. There has been a 
good deal of blessing this year at Arima. 

" We enjoyed our visit to Arima ; the longer we 
stayed the more sorry we were to leave. The 
mineral baths were most enjoyable. We came to 
Kobe on the I5th, and on the ipth went to Kioto, 
the ancient capital. It was a great treat to travel by 
rail again. The carriages are very like our English 
ones, and the train goes as slowly as the Manx 
trains. 

" We had a letter of introduction to Dr. and Mrs. 
Barry, of Kioto. They very kindly took us over the 
Doshishi, the largest and first college in Japan. It 
was opened by a Mr. Nissima, a Japanese. There 
are four or five buildings, one alone being as large as 
Manchester High School, and there are now over six 
hundred pupils. All the sciences are taught in fact, 
as good an education given as in the colleges in 
America. There is also a large girls' school, and 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 273 

hospital and dispensary in connection with it. We 
spent all Monday afternoon in going over the build- 
ings, and the evening with Dr. and Mrs. Barry. The 
next morning they kindly arranged with Jinriksha 
men, to take us to all that could be seen in a day. 
They took us to five beautiful temples. In one was 
a Buddha quite sixty feet high ; in another were 
33,000 idols, all so beautifully clean, and the bronze 
and lovely embroidering made them so much more 
beautiful than the ordinary Chinese temples. In 
one there were many hundred worshippers, sitting as 
quietly as a European audience, listening to a Bud- 
dhistic sermon. ... It is so sad to see Japan, with 
all her civilisation, still so closely bound to her idols. 
Next we went to a porcelain warehouse, and saw 
the most exquisite ware being made, all hand-painted. 
Next to a silk warehouse ; but the silk is neither so 
good nor so cheap as in China, though it looks very 
pretty. Kioto is a very fine city, the streets very 
wide and level, and surrounded by high hills. The 
hotel we stayed in was as large and as well fitted 
as the large town hotels and lighted with electric 
light. 

" We next visited Osaka, the commercial capital of 
Japan ; there is not much natural beauty there, a 
great deal of business going on, some fine large 
bridges, the city also lighted with electric light near 
the station and in the Concession. We stayed with 



274 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

Dr. and Mrs. D., American missionaries whom we met 
in Arima, but as we had so short a time in Osaka we 
could not see much of their work. All the mission- 
aries in Japan are engaged more or less on educa- 
tional lines ; they are not free to work where and as 
they like. The Japanese are most anxious to do 
without the foreigners, and even the Christians say, 
' Give us the money and you can go home, we can 
manage our own affairs.' There is not a foreigner in 
any Government position now ; they despise them 
more than the Chinese do I think. They don't like 
a Japanese to marry a foreign lady. They say ' Our 
men are too good for your women, but our women 
will do for your men.' 

"We are very thankful that our work lies in China, 
for though we have trials and difficulties they have 
not, they have difficulties we know nothing of. The 
Japanese are lively, polite, clever people, beautifully 
clean, and in many respects lovable, but they have 
no depth. Quickly converted to Christianity, many 
as quickly go back ; they often take offence and 
leave one church and join another. The Chinese, on 
the other hand, are quiet, sober people, filthy in all 
their habits, slow to take in an idea, and as slow to 
adopt it, but when once they do, nothing will move 
them If a Chinaman is truly converted to God he 
remains firm, in spite of persecutions." 

On our return home I wrote the following : 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 275 

" WENCHOW, Oct. 28, 1892. 

"We returned home last Thursday, and were so 
delighted to get back again ; one would have thought 
we had been away a year to see the excitement. 
All our dear natives were crowded round the door to 
bid us welcome ; all, including the babies, had to be 
spoken to, so that it was quite a few minutes before 
we could notice Miss Whitford and Miss Chalmers 
The latter has been very ill ; for two or three days the 
doctor feared she might not live. We were so thankful 
to see her almost strong again, only looking thinner. 

" The day after our return, the country Christians 
and candidates arrived ; five were examined, but 
only two men were baptized. On Sunday we had a 
splendid day ; the pastor spoke with much power 
on Christ cleansing the Temple. He also turned to 
Corinthians : * Ye are the temple of the Holy Ghost.' 
He asked some searching questions, such as, * What 
has our heart been during the last month, the temple 
of God, or a den of thieves ? ' I am sure all felt the 
power of his words, and we thank God for his faithful 
testimony." 

As soon as possible we recommenced our autumn 
country work, our first journey being to O-dzing. 
Miss Whitford has written a journal giving details of 
our experiences during that and the Tong-t'so visit, 
which will be more interesting than any words of 
mine. She writes : 



276 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" November loth, Thursday. On the second of this 
month Mrs. Stott and Miss Bardsley left us for a trip 
to O-dzing, one of the out-stations. They left in the 
afternoon, and came to the end of their boat journey 
up the river too late to proceed any further that night, 
so composed themselves to rest where they were. 
Early in the morning they were ready to start, but 
owing to the difficulty of arranging with chairbearers, 
&c., it was quite eight o'clock before they could get 
off. The men were not well up to their work, and 
before long they began to grumble and say they could 
not carry them, and as it was a twelve hours' journey 
that was rather a bad look-out ; it ended in their 
walking altogether about half the way, until they 
could do no more ; and even then Miss B.'s men 
set her down within a short distance of her destina- 
tion, declaring they could take her no further ; but 
Mrs. S. pushed forward, and sent men back to fetch 
her. They went out with torches and brought her in 
in true festive style, and the hearty welcome they 
here received made up tor all the hardships of the 
way. The journey is a very pretty and picturesque 
one ; but the beauties were not so well appreciated 
this time, owing to the discomfort ; one cannot enjoy 
beautiful scenery when too weary to put one foot 
before the other. 

After supper, they left the preacher to conduct 
evening prayers, and retired at once, hoping to get a 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 277 

good night's sleep after the fatigues of the day. But 
alas for their hopes ! They had just got to sleep when 
they were aroused by a regiment of rats, scrambling 
and squeaking in very close proximity. They got up 
and arranged the mosquito curtains so as to keep 
them at least off the bed, and once more composed 
themselves ; but not for long. Again they were 
aroused by the same noises, and this time they lit the 
candle and left it burning all night, which seemed to 
scare away the intruders. Meantime the rats had 
visited the next room, where the wearied chairbearers 
and the preacher had forgotten their trials in rather 
noisy slumber, and in the morning the preacher was 
minus a stocking, which they had carried away bodily 
to their nest. 

" Miss B. had taken with her a small medicine- 
chest, and the morning of the next day (Friday) 
was employed in seeing patients, doctoring bad eyes, 
bandaging sore legs, &c. ; the rest of the day being 
spent in visiting the Christians and inquirers near at 
hand, and a visit was also paid to the wife of the arch- 
persecutor of two years ago, and she seemed pleased 
to renew the acquaintance made last year. 

" On Saturday a visit was paid to two villages about 
seven or eight miles distant, where the gospel was 
preached and some inquirers visited. In one of these 
villages there were seven, four of whom seemed very 
earnest, and gave evidence of true conversion ; in the 
other village there were only two, 



278 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" Sunday was wet, but notwithstanding the ele- 
ments about thirty-four, mostly Christians and in- 
quirers, turned out, and three hearty services were 
held, all of which Mrs. Stott took herself, as well as 
morning and evening prayers every day. She feels 
the importance of giving the Christians as much Bible- 
reading as possible during these visits, as it is almost 
the only opportunity they have. She was especially 
pleased with their interest during this visit, and the 
evident pleasure and intelligence with which they 
listened at all the services. 

" Monday was wet, so the morning was spent in 
seeing patients, and the afternoon in letter-writing. 
In the evening there was a very good audience, and 
quite a number of strangers sat still and listened 
attentively all through, part of the address being for 
them and part for the Christians. 

" On Tuesday morning Miss B. was to start about 
four o'clock for Wenchow. The cook, who is ever on 
the alert when there is anything extra to be done, 
first roused the people at one o'clock ; on being told 
the time, he subsided again for a little while, but at 
2.30 insisted on all getting up ; before that the hostess 
had been preparing breakfast, which was ready. Soon 
after a start was effected, Miss B. and the cook leav- 
ing for Wenchow, the two sons of the house accom- 
panying them with torches as far as necessary. After 
they were gone, Mrs. Stott finished the packing, &c., 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 279 

and after assembling the family for prayers, she also 
left just as dawn broke (about 6 a.m.) for a long 
journey across country to Tung-t'so, another out- 
station. A halt was made at mid-day at a hall which 
is rented as a chapel by Mr. S. of the Methodist Free 
Church, and the night was spent at the house of some 
inquirers of his. It was dark when Mrs. S. reached 
their house, and they had shut up for the night ; but 
they gave the travellers a kind and hospitable wel- 
come, and soon hands were preparing the food which 
they had brought with them for supper. 

" The next day they again set off, and Tung-t'so 
(where I had already arrived) was reached about 
3 p.m., after a wet and trying journey. 

" But I must go back a little. The Monday after 
Mrs. S. left Wenchow an old woman, one of the 
members who had been ill some time, passed peace- 
fully away. A few days before the Bible-woman had 
visited her and asked her if the Lord was going to 
call her. ' In a few days/ she said. ' Are you ready 
to go ? ' * Quite ready ; I see a crown and a white 
robe prepared for me.' ' Is Jesus with you ? ' * Yes, 
He is with me.' ' Does anything trouble you ? ' ' No, 
I am quite happy.' This woman's daughter was one 
of Mrs. Stott's first and most earnest Christian women ; 
she died about four years ago ; but before that she 
literally prayed her husband and her mother saved, 
never resting until they were both within the fold. 



280 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

" On the Tuesday I left Wenchow about 5.30 p.m. 
for Tung-t'so. The first part of the journey was per- 
formed in a boat, my companions being one of the 
Bible-women and my servant. When I wanted to 
retire for the night I put up a shawl for a curtain to 
screen me from the boatmen, but they had to pass 
through, to take turns in rowing, during the night. 
Of course I did not undress, but I washed my hands 
and face in the morning, which was more than any of 
my companions did. 

" We breakfasted in the boat, and soon after nine 
o'clock started to walk to our destination about seven 
miles distant, half of which was over a high and steep 
hill. As the day was very wet we had some difficulty 
in getting a man to carry our bedding, &c., and you 
may imagine in such weather our progress was not 
very rapid, the stone path over the hill being exceed- 
ingly slippery with the rain, so that we did not reach 
Tung-t'so till about I p.m., just about two hours 
before Mrs. Stott arrived from the other direction. 
We both needed a rest that afternoon, and in the 
evening there were quite a number of strangers who 
listened to the preaching of the gospel. 

" The next morning was wet, so we could not go 
out, but in the afternoon we went to a village a short 
distance off, where a service is held on alternate Sun- 
days, and where there are several Christians and 
inquirers. It is a very poor place, and the people are 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 281 

very dirty ; we spoke a little, but they did not seem 
to care much to listen, except those who were already 
interested. One old man whom we visited had been 
ill for two months with a trying disease : his wife is 
very much against his being a Christian, and does not 
treat him well ; she needs our prayers that her heart 
may be changed and softened by God's Spirit. 

"Friday (nth) was fair, so we started soon after 
breakfast to visit two or three places where there are 
Christians and inquirers ; we took our dinner with 
us as the people around this district are so poor 
they have scarcely enough for themselves. After 
greeting our friends and doing some preaching, we 
were shown to a room to eat our dinner. I wish I 
could describe that room the poorest barn would be 
a palace to it. We sat on the side of a bed, which 
was simply boards covered with a straw mat ; the 
floor was stone, and all around was dirt and lumber 
of every description. One side was simply open 
basket-work, through which numerous pairs of prying 
eyes watched us eating our sandwiches ; opposite was 
a large hole in the partition, also used as a peephole, 
and through which two basins of tea were presently 
handed to us to save opening the door, and while we 
were drinking our tea an arm and shoulder was again 
thrust in, to search for a key on the top of an old 
cupboard which stood conveniently near. 

" After dinner we again spoke a little, and then 



282 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

went on to the next place, to reach which it was 
necessary to cross a ferry. The boat was found to be 
two or three inches deep in water, and there was no 
one in charge, so after baling some of the water out, 
we disposed ourselves round the edges as best we 
could, Mrs. Stott's chair being set in the middle, the 
chairbearers pulled us to the other side, where we 
visited two villages, and met with a rather noisy 
reception. Some, however, listened to our message, 
though many were more intent on looking at us. 

" On Saturday we only went a short distance, as we 
wanted to be back early in the afternoon, there being 
several candidates to be examined for baptism ; so we 
went to a village just the other side of the hill I had 
crossed coming here, where there were three inquirers. 
We had dinner at the house of one of them, an old 
man and his wife, who were anxious to have some 
one come every Sunday to hold a service, or to stay 
there, because they say there are several people who 
would be willing to listen if there were some one to 
teach them. This can easily be arranged next year, 
when our boys, who are in for training, come home to 
live here, as they will go out on Sundays. When we 
returned in the afternoon there were candidates to be 
examined, seven in all, but one did not arrive till 
Sunday morning, so will have to wait. There were 
one man and four women from the place we visited 
on Thursday, and the old woman at whose house we 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 283 

dined that day ; the latter was advised to wait, as she 
did not seem quite clear. All the others answered 
well, and seemed quite decided about conversion, and 
that they had experienced it. Two women were the 
wives of men who were baptized in the early part of 
the year ; the husbands of the other two are not yet 
believers, and one of these especially needs our prayers. 
She was up for examination a few months ago, but 
was put off because she had not quite broken off the 
habit of coarse language ; her husband is quarrelsome 
and scolds her, and is altogether very difficult to get 
on with, and she seems still afraid lest she should give 
way and answer him back in a wrong way ; but we 
told her to go on praying for him, and the Lord would 
hear and help her. 

" The baptismal service was held at daybreak at a 
stream just below the chapel ; we had it thus early 
because the people seemed very much excited on the 
Saturday night, and we feared they might make a 
disturbance, so about a dozen of us went down 
quietly, and it was just over when the villagers began 
to stir ; in another few minutes they would all have 
been round us. We had two good services morning 
and afternoon, about forty Christians and inquirers 
being present ; in the morning we had communion, 
of which about twenty partook. We have had morn- 
ing and evening prayers with the Christians each day, 
and every evening except one which was wet. We 



284 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

have had large audiences who, although rather rowdy 
at first, have listened attentively and quietly to the 
preaching of the gospel ; and we cannot but believe 
that God will bless the seed thus sown to the saving 
of many more souls in this district. 

" On Monday the I4th we started directly after 
breakfast for Si-kae, a .place about twenty miles 
north-west of Tung-t'so, where the gospel was first 
taken by the old firewood-seller, now a colporteur, 
who has been the means of opening up several places. 
He went there selling books, and, finding the people 
willing to listen, spent a few weeks with them, and 
one of the men came into Wenchow with him to buy 
a Testament and hymn-book. Now there are about 
ten inquirers, and the Tung-t'so preacher goes there 
once a month to hold service and teach them. It was 
a day's journey through most lovely country hills and 
mountains ; the river, now reduced to a mere mountain 
stream, rippling over the stones and winding in and 
out amongst the hills, requiring to be crossed and 
recrossed again and again as we proceeded. As it 
was entirely new ground we were not at all sure what 
sort of a reception we should meet with, and were 
agreeably surprised to find the people much quieter 
and better behaved than those of the Tung-t'so 
district. The men were not in when we arrived, and 
the women did not seem particularly glad to see us, 
as none of them were Christians ; but they soon sent 



"THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 285 

for the others, and prepared to sweep out the best 
room for our accommodation. 

"In the evening we had a good audience, who 
listened quietly and attentively to the gospel 
message, the inquirers who were present drinking in 
every word. Mrs. Stott asked one of them if he 
believed in Jesus the Saviour. He said, ' I can't 
find Him.' She said, ' Are you willing to worship 
Him ? ' 'I am willing.' * Are you willing to trust 
Him?' 'Yes.' 'Then He will teach you what you 
don't understand.' 

" When the people dispersed we retired, as we 
hoped, to rest, for we were very tired ; but there was 
not much sleep to be got that night. We had been 
previously cheered by the information that there were 
a good many rats ; but we were not prepared for the 
attacks of the fleas with which the bed evidently 
swarmed, and which proceeded to business with 
vigour as soon as we lay down ; between them and 
the noise of rats gamboling about the room, together 
with the yelping of a dog just outside during the 
greater part of the night, we did not get much sleep 
during the two nights we spent there ; indeed Mrs. 
Stott got none at all, and was consequently pretty 
well worn-out by the time she left. 

" On Tuesday morning we went out to the house of 
one of the inquirers and spoke to some of his neigh- 
bours ; then, being tired, I returned to the house, 



286 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

and Mrs. S. went on to another place, where she met 
with some Hunan braves, who are stationed there for 
the protection of the hills, and who listened very 
attentively, asking questions and buying books and 
tracts. One of them asked Mrs. S. how long she had 
been in Wenchow. She said, 'Twenty years.' He 
said, c You have been there so long, and why have 
you never come here before to tell us the gospel 
message ? ' She told him she never heard of Si-kae 
till this year. 

" In the evening we again had a good audience, who 
listened attentively to an explanation of the prodigal 
son. It is becoming more and more difficult to pro- 
vide for these places, as they open up at greater and 
greater distances from Wenchow. We were told of 
another place, yet six miles further on, where one 
woman believed. Roughly speaking, between fifty 
and sixty miles from W T enchow as a centre, how are 
these places to get regular teaching and superintend- 
ence ? The only way seems to be to take one or two 
into the city for teaching, then send them back to 
impart what they know to their brethren ; but few 
have time for this, as they all live from hand to 
mouth, so to speak. However, three of the inquirers 
from Si-kae are hoping to come into the city in the 
nth Chinese month, when the preachers come for a 
month's reading, and if these are satisfactory, and can 
spare time, two of them may stay for a year or two's 



" THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 287 

training, as our other boys will be going home in the 
1 2th month. 

" Thursday, ijth. After an early breakfast and 
prayers with the Christians we left Si-kae yesterday 
morning on our homeward journey. The first part 
of the road was got over very quickly, but shortly 
before twelve o'clock it came on to rain heavily, and 
continued the rest of the afternoon. About two o'clock 
we reached the riverside wet and tired, and found a 
boat just waiting to be hired ; so, after a little bar- 
gaining as to price, we got in and established ourselves, 
heartily glad to be on our way home. We went to 
bed directly after supper, and before daybreak were 
anchored outside the east gate of Wenchow. We 
walked up in the morning twilight, and on reaching 
home the first step was to get a good bath and clean 
clothes, after which we felt respectable once more." 



CHAPTER XX 
1893 

" In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence." PROV. xiv. 26. 

shall see greater things than these." Such 
was the message I received from a dear friend 
in December, 1892. It came to my heart as a pro- 
mise from my Father for the new year we were soon 
to enter ; and, just as I determined to take it as my 
New Year's motto, another friend's message, " Greater 
things than these shall ye do," confirmed my faith, 
and I was enabled to claim them as promises. Mrs. 
Liu, our faithful and spiritual helper for years, was 
very ill, and twice we gave up all hope of her recovery. 
Her son was at Tai-chow helping in the medical work 
there, so I wrote asking Mr. Rudland to let him return 
at once, as I feared his mother might soon pass away. 
He came, and was thankful to find her out of danger. 
All through her illness her testimony to the Lord's 
nearness was very precious. One morning when I 
went to see her she smiled, and said, " The Lord has 
been with me all night ; He showed me His face so 



"IN THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 289 

lovely I wanted to see more of Him, and was sorry 
when morning came. I want to go to heaven to see 
Mr. Stott and Mrs. Oae, but best of all to see Jesus." 
She had been helping Miss Whitford in the school for 
three years and could ill be spared. Through the 
Lord's mercy she was restored. 

There had been quite a revival in several of the 
T'ai-chow out-stations. We had heard of 170 persons 
baptized in a few months, and longed that we should 
see like blessing. I asked Mr. Liu if he would give 
us on Sunday afternoon a little account of the work 
there; so, instead of separating into our several classes, 
we all came together to hear what God had been 
doing in other places. Our hearts warmed as we 
heard of 147 baptisms in 1892. In the course of his 
remarks Mr. Liu said that Wenchow was considered 
the first station, both in numbers and spiritual power, 
while T'ai-chow was second. When he had finished 
I felt constrained to add a few words. I remarked 
that Wenchow had stood first, but could do so no 
longer. I contrasted our poor thirty with their 147, 
and asked who would join me in a week's daily 
prayer for deeper spiritual power in our own souls, 
and new life for others. Up went many hands. I 
asked what we should pray for, and one brother 
called out, "Seven hundred souls!" I was taken 
aback ; my poor faith had not risen above one 
hundred. I said, " Let us think well before we speak, 

20 



290 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

God is able to give us all we have faith for." Then 
one dear man called out, " Up with your hands for 
three hundred next year." I pointed out that if each 
member would win one soul to Christ our numbers 
would just be doubled, and that seemed very little. 
So it was settled that as many as possible should 
meet for prayer every day during the first week of 
the Chinese year 1893 > tnat a f ter prayer we should 
make up several bands, and go in different directions, 
preaching the glorious gospel, and we expected much 
blessing. 

We had a watch-night's service, and the next 
morning met at 10 a.m. for prayer. The room was 
quite full. I spoke from Titus ii., showing what sort 
of Christians we must be if we would receive the 
blessings we ask for. It was a heart-searching time. 
Our prayers were first for ourselves, that we might 
have more spiritual power, and be made more fit for 
our Master's use, and second for a large ingathering 
of souls. I cannot doubt but that these prayers were 
heard and answered, though not in the way we 
expected ; for at first the answers seemed to come in 
disappointments loss, not gain, was our experience 
during that week. 

Mrs. Liu's serious illness was succeeded by the death 
of five of our members. One family was plunged 
into sore and continuous persecution. Worst of all, 
one man fell into open sin, while the pastor forgot 



"/AT THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 291 

his holy calling and gave way to wrath. We felt, like 
Jacob, "all these things are against us"; but, like Job, 
we could also say, " Though He slay me yet will I trust 
in Him." The pastor's case was particularly sad. 
On the Sunday afternoon following our week of 
prayer, during our women's missionary meeting, our 
coolie's wife had laid down the money she was about 
to give on the seat beside her. Next to her sat the 
pastor's wife, who, though unconverted, had been for 
some time attending our meetings. While I was 
speaking the coolie's wife was called away for a 
moment, and on her return the money was gone. No 
one had risen from their seat, and suspicion naturally 
fell upon the pastor's wife ; all the more so because she 
had done a similar thing before. After the service the 
coolie went to ask her if she had seen the money, when 
she flew into a rage and stormed ; he then returned, and 
told me what had happened. The next morning the 
pastor came, in almost as great a rage as his wife, 
said the coolie had accused her of stealing, and unless 
I made him apologise he would give up his position. 
He was too angry to reason with, so I told him to go 
away, and return when he could talk calmly. In the 
meantime I made inquiries, found that the coolie had 
neither said or done wrong, but that the woman had 
told a string of lies to her husband, who was not 
there when the thing happened. When Mr. T'siu 
came back he could speak more calmly, but was still 



292 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

angry. I pointed out that he, not the coolie, had 
done wrong, and that there were three Christian 
witnesses against the word of his wife ; and as he had 
done the brother a wrong he was the one who ought 
to apologise. This he refused to do, and gave up his 
position as a preacher. Poor man, my heart ached 
for him. His worthless wife wasted his money so 
that even when receiving a good salary he was always 
in the depths of poverty. What he could do now I 
knew not. 

A few weeks later the coolie came and asked that 
Mr. T'siu might be restored to employment again. 
He said, " I don't want him to confess to me that he 
has done wrong. I fully and freely forgive him, and 
have asked God to forgive him too. He is very poor 
and I am sorry for him." I was so glad to see such 
a Christlike spirit, and thought it might be God's way 
of breaking Mr. T'siu's proud heart. I sent for him 
and offered him employment as teacher to Miss B. 
and myself, telling him it was at Yung-ts'iah's request, 
mentioning what he had said, and that he owed his 
position to the man he had wronged. He was very 
glad to get back, and thanked me ; but not one word 
of thanks to the coolie. How true it is that the one 
who does the wrong is the hardest to win ! 

This loss, which seemed so irreparable at the time, 
has only made room for one of the most able as well 
as Spirit-taught men I have ever known in China 



"IN THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 293 

Mr. T'sie was school teacher at the time, having come 
from Bing-yie, where he had for some years been 
helping Mr. G., and naturally stepped into the position 
of pastor in the stead of Mr. T'siu. He has been my 
greatest comfort, and the seconder of every active and 
good work ever since, 

That was a sad, sad week. We had asked for more 
of the Holy Spirit's work in our hearts, and we got 
sorrow, and for increase there was scattering ; yet we 
knew the Lord was answering our prayers, and could 
only ask Him to cleanse still further, until all that 
hindered His blessing should be taken out of the 
way. Over-strain of work, sorrow, and sleeplessness 
undermined my health, and while taking Chinese 
prayers one morning in April I grew faint, and had 
to be carried oilt of the room. The doctor was sent 
for, and ordered perfect quiet and rest for some days. 
After lying on the couch for a whole week doing 
nothing, he ordered me away for a change. I was 
unwilling to go far, or for long at such a time, so 
Miss B. and I went up the river by boat to a pretty 
waterfall for a week. I returned better, but still 
weak, and as I made very slow progress towards 
recovery the doctor advised me to take a sea voyage, 
and in June we went to Che-foo, where we had to 
remain four months under doctor's orders, Dr. D. 
refusing to allow me to return sooner. While I was 
ill we had the joy of baptizing five out of nine candi- 



294 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

dates ; they came to my room one by one, as I 
wanted to hear their testimony, but of course I did 
not see them baptized. 

In the month of April we were reinforced by Miss 
Stayner, from Canada ; she at once set herself to 
acquiring the language, which she did both quickly 
and well, and has been a most efficient helper. 

An extract from a letter written in that month 
states : " By God's grace the clouds have cleared ; 
we have since had cause to praise Him for much 
blessing ; many of the Christians have been stirred 
up to more earnest effort after the unsaved. Our 
large chapel, which seats 350, has several times been 
crowded with Christians and inquirers to its utmost 
capacity, and we are brought face to face with the 
question of enlarging our borders ; either the chapel 
must be made bigger, or a new one opened outside 
the South Gate. Last month five were received by 
baptism, and yesterday we had the joy of adding ten 
more, while seven others who were not so clear in 
their testimonies were kept back. Some of the cases 
were particularly interesting ; two were mother and 
son. The old woman told me when her son was very 
ill, and she feared he might die, she remembered 
some of the words told her that the living God could 
heal and help. In the darkness of the night she 
prayed to the unknown God. She saw no one, but 
heard a voice saying, * If you will trust Me I will not 



"IN THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 295 

only heal your son, but save your soul.' This was 
nearly two years ago, when her son also became a 
believer, and now they have been baptized together. 
Other two were uncle and nephew. We are be- 
ginning now to see families brought to the Lord more 
frequently than formerly, and it is a great joy 
specially to see the young men brought out on the 
Lord's side." 

While I was in Che-foo I received a letter from 
Miss Chalmers, which proved that the prayers and 
promises of the early part of the year had not been 
forgotten. She spoke of one Sunday when Mr. T'sie 
preached from Rev. iii. 15-21. All seemed to realise 
that one-half of the year had gone and not as many 
souls been gathered as they had hoped, for the 
prayers were for more earnestness in that direction, 
and after the sermon Mr. T'sie asked one or two to 
pray, when Aoming prayed, and completely broke 
down. He stopped, went on again two or three 
times, and confessed he had been cold-hearted of late, 
and in the afternoon meeting the same spirit of con- 
fession prevailed. 

I now insert a letter written after my return : 
"Sept., 1893. With very grateful thanks to our 
Heavenly Father I write again from Wenchow, the 
home of tender memories, of joy and sorrow, sowing 
and reaping ; oh, it is good to be back amongst my 
dear people again ; you would have supposed we had 



296 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

been away four years instead of four months. Misses 
W., C, and S. went down to the lower anchorage to 
meet us ; we saw them on the shore, but the captain, 
who is a stranger, would not wait for them, and so 
they arrived home an hour after us. As soon as the 
anchor was down our two servants, with beaming 
faces, appeared ; as we stepped on the jetty we were 
greeted by three of our women, who had taken a long 
walk to meet us, and when we entered our gates we 
were surrounded by men, women, and children, all 
eager for a word ; they were delighted to see me 
looking so well, and said it was in answer to their 
prayers, for they had prayed every day that I might 
come back well and strong. Everything was in per- 
fect order, even to flowers nicely arranged in all the 
rooms ; my servants never spare themselves if thereby 
they can spare me. 

" We arrived on our women's prayer-meeting day, 
and of course more than usual were present ; all the 
prayers were full of thankfulness for our return. On 
Sunday we had a splendid day. I only took one 
service myself, for I mean to do less than formerly ; 
indeed I have already arranged the work so that I 
shall only have three classes a week besides morning 
prayers, and I intend to confine myself to five hours' 
brain-work per day, except when the preachers are in. 
In another week or so we expect a number of candi- 
dates for baptism ; I do not yet know how many. 



" IN THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 297 

We are still praying for greater things, but we want 
each member to be truly converted. Somehow I 
have a fear of large numbers. Perhaps it is want of 
faith, but in China it usually leads to trouble, and yet 
He is able to convert many as well as few. Do pray 
that no unsaved one may be received into the 
Church. 

" I hope, if the Lord will, to start for O-dzing on 
the first journey of the season on the i8th of next 
month. Miss Stayner will accompany me ; this will 
be her first visit to the country, and she is looking 
forward to it with much pleasure. Did I tell you 
that I had a very comfortable sedan-chair presented 
to me by a former captain of the s.s. Haichang. It 
will be a real comfort on our country trips, for the 
hill chairs take more out of me than the talking does, 
yet I did not like to buy one lest the natives might 
think I spent too much upon myself. The captain 
had left the Wenchow route more than two years ago, 
and we had neither seen or heard of him for a long 
while ; surely the Lord put the thought of the chair 
into his mind. The other day in our women's meet- 
ing my subject was Phil. iv. 19, ' My God shall supply 
all your needs.' After I had finished one of the 
members prayed. She told the Lord one of their 
needs was a new chapel outside the South Gate, that 
they had been praying all the year about it, and now 
she asked for the fulfilment. When she finished I 



298 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

told them they must work as well as pray, and asked 
how many dollars they had contributed towards it ; 
they replied not any yet, but they intended calling a 
meeting and ask what each one was able to give. I 
mean to leave them to carry out this project them- 
selves, helping them a little when the time comes. I 
love to see them take more and more responsibility 
in church work, and shall be delighted when I can 
leave the acceptance of candidates entirely in their 
hands. Candidates are accepted by the church, but 
I see them all privately first, and while they some- 
times keep back one whom I have passed, they would 
often pass one I would keep back. 

" A little later I was all Saturday afternoon 
examining candidates ; eight (four men and four 
women) were baptized yesterday morning. The 
prayer-meeting on Saturday night lasted from 7.15 
till 10 o'clock ; all gave bright testimonies, and some 
are very interesting cases. Yesterday was a grand 
day, the chapel packed in every corner ; some of us 
had to sit on the platform. We began the baptismal 
service at 9 a.m. ; there was no break, and the com- 
munion service closed at 12.10. We snatched a 
hurried meal, and at one o'clock I had the preachers' 
meeting for an hour ; at 2 p.m. we had the afternoon 
service, which lasted until 3.30. Quite a number 
stayed all night, and at eight o'clock next morning I 
had a service with them ; 75 were present. The 



"LV THE FEAR OF THE LORD" 297 

We are still praying for greater things, but we want 
each member to be truly converted. Somehow I 
have a fear of large numbers. Perhaps it is want of 
faith, but in China it usually leads to trouble, and yet 
He is able to convert many as well as few. Do pray 
that no unsaved one may be received into the 
Church. 

" I hope, if the Lord will, to start for O-dzing on 
the first journey of the season on the i8th of next 
month. Miss Stayner will accompany me ; this will 
be her first visit to the country, and she is looking 
forward to it with much pleasure. Did I tell you 
that I had a very comfortable sedan-chair presented 
to me by a former captain of the s.s. Haichang. It 
will be a real comfort on our country trips, for the 
hill chairs take more out of me than the talking does, 
yet I did not like to buy one lest the natives might 
think I spent too much upon myself The captain 
had left the Wenchow route more than two years ago, 
and we had neither seen or heard of him for a long 
while ; surely the Lord put the thought of the chair 
into his mind. The other day in our women's meet- 
ing my subject was Phil. iv. 19, ' My God shall supply 
all your needs.' After I had finished one of the 
members prayed. She told the Lord one of their 
needs was a new chapel outside the South Gate, that 
they had been praying all the year about it, and now 
she asked for the fulfilment. When she finished I 



CHAPTER XXI 

" Thy expectation shall not be cut off." PROV. xxiv. 14. 

EARLY in October Miss Stayner and I started 
for O-dzing, but I must leave Miss S. to give 
the account of that journey, for it takes all my time 
and strength to do the work at such times, so that 
writing about it has to be left to another pen, if not, 
the journey remains unwritten, as an accumulation of 
work forbids my giving details after my return home. 
If these journeys should prove interesting to the 
reader they are wholly indebted to the kindness of 
my young helpers, who often recount our experiences 
while I am resting. Miss Stayner writes : 

" The O-dzing pastor waited over in Wenchow for a 
few days so as to come on with us. We left the city 
on Thursday evening ; at least, we got into our boat 
and settled down for the night, though the tide did 
not permit our leaving till about I a.m. This river- 
boat is covered by a thick mat called a ' bong,' arch- 
fashion, an uncovered place only being left at bow and 

300 



"THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 301 

stern for the boatmen. One end of our primitive 
cabin was boarded up, and a number of boards at a 
little height from the floor at that end formed a good 
bedstead. Our mat, and thin mattress, were laid on 
top of that, and, shutting ourselves off from our 
Chinese co-travellers by tying up a little curtain, we 
made ourselves quite cosy for the night. By daylight 
we were up so as to be dressed and have our break- 
fast before arriving at the place from which we were 
to take chairs. The boats only go about three miles 
an hour, so we had come up the river about twelve 
miles during the night. We then had to go nearly 
thirty miles across the country to O-dzing. How 
different travelling is in China from at home ! Here 
we take a day and night to do what would take about 
an hour for our own slow trains to do. Our chair- 
bearers and those carrying our luggage were all 
Christians, or inquirers who had come down for us 
from this village. 

" Mrs. Stott had brought her own sedan-chair, a 
light, open basket one, but I must really try to 
describe mine to you. It was a mountain-chair, and 
as such was of the simplest and lightest construction, 
as you may well imagine when I say that when one 
of the men brought it down to the jetty over one 
shoulder it seemed to consist of little else than the 
two long bamboo poles, with the shorter pieces at 
each end joining these together for the men to rest 



302 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

on their shoulders. But in a minute, with two short 
boards, he arranged a back and a seat, which swung 
from the side poles by ropes, and longer pieces of 
rope supported a stick upon which the feet were to 
rest. You will be saying that must be most uncom- 
fortable to sit in for nearly a whole day ; but wait, 
Mrs. Stott has not been over twenty years in China 
without knowing how to make the best of things. 
Our wadded bed coverlet was fastened round the 
back and seat, thus making a broad, comfortable seat, 
and softer back. Wrapping rugs round our knees, 
having warm jackets on, the morning air being 
delightfully cool, our caravan started in ' Chinese 
file.' It consisted of us, our two chairs, our cook, 
who trudged behind, a man with our bedding, and 
our servants, another with our big provision basket, 
&c., the preacher, and two other men who had come 
with us from Wenchow. We made quite a respect- 
able and picturesque little procession as we wound 
along the path, through the plain, or up and down 
the mountain roads. Each man had his own loads 
over his shoulder, yet they walked that twenty-eight 
or thirty miles without faltering, only stopping two or 
three times for rest, and in the evening they were all 
at prayers, and the pastor gave quite a long, animated 
address. They are splendid walkers, these country 
fellows who live amongst the mountains, and their 
well-built, muscular frames are a pleasant contrast to 



"THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 303 

the thin, skinny specimens which are so common in 
and around the city. 

" The scenery is just lovely, and one can take it all 
in so nicely sitting quietly back in one's chair, no one 
to distract, and plenty of time to notice in detail, 
instead of dashing through in an express train. The 
plain through which we went for the first three hours 
or so is not very broad, high hills, and even moun- 
tains, I imagine, rising on every side. We followed 
the course of a picturesque little river for some way, 
now on this side of it, now on that, crossing it either 
by stepping-stones or else the men wading through 
where it was shallow. Often we felt inclined to take 
a good long walk, but we had to save up for a very 
high ' ling ' (mountain pass) where the chairs could 
not carry us. This was near the end of our journey, 
so the bearers were pretty well tired out when we 
started to descend into the valley where O-dzing is 
situated, about two hundred chimneys (they thus 
reckon the size of their villages) nestling in the midst 
of the mountains, and with a clear mountain stream 
flowing by. We crossed the stream by stepping- 
stones, and went through the straggling lanes, some 
so closely built up our chairs could hardly turn the 
corners, and turned into this house, where we met 
with a very warm reception. 

As soon as we got into our room they brought us 
delicious hot tea, made out of pressed and dried 



304 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

oranges, sweetened, and ever since they have been 
heaping us with all their best eatables. We brought 
enough provisions with us to serve for a few meals, 
but Mrs. Stott knew there was no need to bring 
much, as they always insisted on giving us Chinese 
food. Fortunately they know our tastes somewhat, 
so we manage to get on very well, though they are 
greatly distresed at the small quantity we eat, they 
thinking nothing of a couple of basins of rice. Their 
food is so much less nourishing than ours, they are 
obliged to eat a greater quantity to support them. 
One boy brought us a quantity of fruit which he had 
been out on the hills gathering, a woman brought us 
cake, while a man who invited us to his house to-day, 
because Mrs. S. felt too tired to go, brought our 
dinner over to us instead. Our host, who is well off, 
allows an old blind man to live in one corner of his 
house, and half supports him ; the other day our 
hostess came up with quite a fine fowl, which she said 
this old man had been feeding up for the last few 
weeks for Mrs. Stott. 

"On Saturday three men came in from some villages 
to be examined for baptism, and two were accepted, 
the other being told he had better wait a little, as on 
some points he was not very clear yet, though all 
think he is a Christian. The baptisms took place 
down at the river, about six o'clock on Sunday morn- 
ing, before many people were about, as these country 



THY EXPECTATION SPIALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 305 

people of course would not understand baptism, and 
we might gather quite a noisy crowd. As we stood 
there on the rocks beside the sparkling, running 
water, on that bright, clear morning, how our prayers 
did rise for these two thus definitely professing to 
follow Christ in the sacred ordinance so significant 
and so new to them ; and how they needed our 
prayers ! one just a boy of twenty-two, and both 
simple and ignorant, and so few opportunities in 
their distant mountain home of learning more about 
spiritual things. 

" After breakfast Mrs. Stott and I went to sit for a 
while on the side of the hill, and had a little quiet 
reading, prayer, and singing, no one coming near to 
disturb us. At about nine we had service, Mrs. S. 
speaking from Ephesians ii., our position before we 
were converted, ending with a few earnest words to 
some strangers who were there, and then about 
twenty or so natives, with ourselves, partook of the 
Lord's Supper. We were greatly struck with the 
earnestness and reverence of all through the whole 
service. Early in the afternoon, for the convenience 
of those who lived at a distance, we had a second 
service, at which Mrs. S. spoke on the same chapter 
in Ephesians what we are now in Christ. 

" We were taken by our hostess to see several people 
living on the other side of the river, and, as Mrs. S. 
was too tired out to take part in the evening service, 

21 



306 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

it was conducted by the preacher, Tsie-ming. Though 
he is the pastor of O-dzing, and his headquarters are 
here still, he is only regularly here once a month on 
Sunday, when they have communion ; the other 
three Sundays he holds services in other villages, 
and the rest of the time goes round evangelising. 

" The people of this house keep a spare room for his 
use, and ours when we are here, and they also give 
up the good-sized room next door for a chapel. It 
is fitted up with a table and benches, and Scripture 
scrolls are hung round the wall, making it quite a 
neat little room. Besides regular Sunday services, 
they have morning and evening prayers, and Thurs- 
day afternoon the women have a prayer-meeting, as 
in Wenchow. In the morning the people of the 
house meet at about six, the men having their rice 
immediately afterwards, just before going to the 
fields, but in the evening most of the Christians come 
to prayers. 

" On Monday we went to Za-bie, where one of the 
inquirers live, a small village about twenty miles 
away. We left about nine in the morning, a bright 
beautiful day, cloudy in the afternoon, so that we did 
not suffer from the heat altogether I can say I think 
I had one of the most enjoyable trips in my life. 
We went right through the very heart of the moun- 
tains, wandering up and down, in and out on the 
narrow paths, sometimes in really dangerous places, 



" THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 307 

where a slip of one of the bearers would have dashed 
us down the steep mountain sides ; but, strange to say, 
even in the worst places I did not really feel afraid, 
though naturally I have a strong aversion to preci- 
pices and high places in general. One seemed to 
realise that the Lord was keeping the feet of those 
who carried us. Two or three times one of 
Mrs. S.'s men stumbled and fell, but never in a 
bad place. 

" I was greatly tickled once. In a very narrow, pre- 
cipitous place her man slipped, and she said, ' Do be 
very careful ' ; for if he fell down here we would all be 
killed. In a most reassuring voice he replied, ' Oh, 
if we are all killed we shall go to heaven ' ; at which 
Mrs. S. said, ' No doubt, but she didn't particularly 
care to go in that way ' ; at which there was a great 
laugh. 

"Za-bie is quite a small village, and must be 
situated several thousand feet above the sea, for 
coming home we noticed it took two hours and 
a quarter from there to the foot of the high ' ling,' 
during which time we were nearly constantly on the 
descent. We had a great affair of it going up the 
1 ling/ for before we had got to the steepest part Mrs. 
S.'s strength gave out, and though it was almost 
impossible to take her up in the chair, the men 
determined they would do it. So two got in front 
and two behind, and with the preacher and her 



308 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

devoted servant occasionally lending a hand at the 
difficult sharp comers, they did manage it. But 
I thought she was really brave to let them, for some- 
times the path was almost straight up. For a time, 
after reaching the top of the * ling/ our path led right 
along a narrow ridge of the mountain, so on either 
side we looked down into the deep valleys, and far 
away to height above height. It was a scene that 
would have rejoiced the heart of a painter, as we saw 
the sun set behind those mountains, and the next 
morning it was even more beautiful on our return 
trip. There was a heavy mist, and for fear of rain 
we started early. The mountains were invisible, but 
as we proceeded the sun began to struggle down and 
the mists to rise. It was just grand. I only wish I 
could picture it to you. Suffice to say Mrs. S., a 
true Scotchwoman, said she thought the scenery 
quite equalled if it did not excel the Highlands, 
and I agreed with her. 

" We had a funny experience at Za-bie. When we 
arrived our host came out and welcomed us, and then 
retired to prepare our bedstead (two boards on two 
benches) while the wife was busy lighting the fire 
to get us something to eat, Mike Martha/ as the 
preacher remarked, so we were left sitting in the 
courtyard to admire a pig, some cocks having a 
regular fight, a cow, and various other domestic 
animals, while some of the village people came in to 



" THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 309 

admire (?) us, being the first foreigners most of them 
had ever seen probably. While waiting we drank 
some tea, I being so thirsty as to indulge in two 
basins ; something for a person who never drinks 
ordinary tea at home. However, please do not let 
any one mistake the word basin ; it is only the size 
of an ordinary large breakfast-cup. After great 
preparations, and when we were nearly famished, the 
good wife brought us up our tea to our room, and 
really at first sight it appeared as though there was 
nothing we could eat but rice. Our servant was 
greatly distressed, so privately told our hostess, we 
liked eggs and potatoes, the latter sweet are con- 
sidered so common they often don't like to offer 
us them, so at breakfast our inner man felt more 
satisfied. 

" That evening sixty or more men and women 
gathered in the courtyard, so we went down, had a 
hymn and a gospel address from Mrs. Stott, after 
which the preacher spoke to them. Even after we 
had retired to rest we heard him preaching to those 
who remained, while a couple of others, our chair- 
bearers I suppose, were speaking to others in the 
kitchen and back premises this after a hard day's 
tramp over the mountains at least twenty miles. 
Does not the earnestness of these young men put 
many of us to shame ? we who have known the 
gospel from the time we knew anything, who have 



3io MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

many of us, been Christians for years, while those 
from O-dzing first heard the way of salvation but 
little over four years ago. 

" It was very amusing ; at night we had quite a 
reception, many of the women came up to our room 
to examine us and our possessions. Finding our 
native light insufficient, they lit long pieces of wood, 
with which they went poking round so close to us 
and to our bedclothes that it made one quite nervous. 
It is a source of astonishment to me that they aren't 
constantly burning down their houses, for this is the 
way they always light themselves round. Much to 
their disgust, Mrs. S. said we were now going to 
retire, and walking calmly to the door, as it were, 
took it for granted they were going out, so for 
shame's sake they felt obliged to, though one 
woman insinuatingly asked Mrs. S. just to lay her 
head down and let them see her rest before they left ; 
however, she said she wasn't ready. The next day, 
when half-way home, I got hungry, an unusual thing; 
so as we had nothing with us, we stopped at a village 
in hopes we could get a ' basin ' of sweet potatoes ; 
however, they had none cooked, and all we could get 
were two heaping basins of ' mie-n,' that is ver- 
micelli. You would have laughed if you had seen 
us sitting in the road, Mrs. S. in her chair, I on a 
small stool beside her, the centre of an admiring 
crowd, digging diligently with our chopsticks into 



" THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 311 

this most inconvenient long stringy stuff, which, how- 
ever, we pretty nearly managed to finish. 

" We had intended going another trip the next day 
to the village where the two newly baptized men 
lived, but at the end of our six hours in chairs from 
Za-bie Mrs. S. was so exhausted she felt it wiser not 
to attempt anything further, but just rest another 
day, quietly visiting and teaching the Christians and 
inquirers, and then return home. 

" We called at the house of the old persecutor, and 
were quite kindly received by his witchlike old wife, 
who gave us some ' z s ' (fresh persimmmon) to take 
away with us. We had such a weird sort of visit, and 
all the time I could think of nothing else but the tale 
of the Witch of Endor. The men had some visitors 
to dinner, so we waited a few minutes for her in the 
usual dark, dirty Chinese kitchen and living-room, 
while she served them. In a small room just off 
we got a glimpse of the big old man and his four 
fine-looking stalwart sons and their guests, while the 
skinny old wife was leaning over the big round rice- 
pot and ladling out steaming bowls of rice and 
vegetables, &c. Some one else was feeding the big 
Chinese stove with brushwood, so that the whole 
scene was lit up by its blaze. Every now and then 
one of the young men would come out with a couple 
of bowls to be heaped up again with rice. 

"One thing, that strikes one most forcibly is the 



312 MISSION WORK' IN CHINA 

utter lack of home comfort amongst even the well- 
off Chinese ; they seem to have no idea of it ; every- 
thing so bare and dark, the living-room as a rule 
with earthen floor, a good portion taken up with the 
stationary brick stove, and just furnished with the 
bare necessities of table and stools ; perhaps a couple 
of uncomfortable little bamboo chairs, a few farming 
implements it may be, and a pile of brushwood 
thrown down complete the picture. Oh, I forgot 
a pig and a few little ones snorting around, and 
a lot of fowls should be added. 

" On the Thursday morning, after final prayers with 
our kind O-dzing friends, we once more mounted our 
chairs and started for home. About a dozen followed 
us right out of the village to the stepping-stones 
across the river, and remained waving their hands 
till we disappeared round the hills, We took a 
different and, I think, a prettier road down to the 
river, where we get the boat, reaching there as it was 
getting dark, though it was not much after six. As 
soon as we had our supper in the house of one of 
Mr. H.'s church members in the village, we got 
Nga-Koe to arrange our bedding in the boat, and 
retired. My principal reason for going thus early 
was so as to go to sleep before I had time to get 
hungry again, as I didn't want the bother of 
reopening up our provision basket. This time our 
mattress was just laid on the bottom of the boat 



" THY EXPECTATION SHALL NOT BE CUT OFF" 313 

crossways, but with curtains fastened up at either 
side, and nice warm rugs. We were quite comfort- 
able, and slept the sleep of the fatigued pilgrim, 
though, in true Chinese style, our boatman made the 
most dreadful noise in starting about midnight, and 
putting up the sail (apparently just over our heads), 
and generally managing the boat. If we had been 
nervous people, sleep would have been utterly out of 
the question. It was a lovely bright moonlight 
night, and when we reached the city about 5.30, 
and walked home, the moon and stars were shining 
brightly at one side, while just over the eastern wall 
the rising sun was beginning to tint the sky, so that 
we thoroughly enjoyed our walk through the quiet 
city streets. 

" And so my first real experience of Chinese 
travelling, of living in Chinese homes, and eating 
Chinese food has come to an end, and, looking back, 
I may say I have enjoyed my week most thoroughly, 
and it makes me long for the time when I shall be 
able to go out and teach these dear native Christians, 
and tell the gospel to those who as yet do not know 
it or its wonderful transforming power in their dark- 
lives." 



CHAPTER XXII 

"Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus 
Christ." 2 TIM. ii. 3. 

ABOUT this time Miss Bardsley began an Anti- 
foot-binding Society. She had been encour- 
aged to this by Mr. M'Gowan, of Amoy, of whose 
work we heard a delightful account when in Che-foo, 
and the success of his Anti-foot-binding Society was 
so remarkable, that we felt quite ashamed that we 
had done so little in that direction. Mr. M'G. kindly 
sent us one of his pledge-books, which contained a 
threefold pledge. First, the woman was to unbind 
her own feet ; secondly, not to bind her daughter's ; 
thirdly, to unbind her daughter-in-law's ; this last I 
thought too hard upon the daughter-in-law, so ours 
took the form of a twofold pledge only. Miss B. 
has been greatly encouraged in her efforts, and, I 
think, has something like seventy members ; it has 
created a truly wholesome sentiment in the church 
on this question. 

The year closed more happily than it began, for, 
although we had not seen the large numbers we had 

314 



"ENDURE HARDNESS" 315 

hoped and prayed for, and sorrow had marked a 
large portion of the year, yet many of the Christians 
had been truly revived in soul, and two new stations 
had been opened. We had a sweet and blessed 
watch-night service, the closing words being Psa. 
xviii. 2. My motto for the coming year was, " My 
soul, wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is 
from Him " ; the words " Wait upon the Lord " I felt 
was to be the lesson for the opening year. 

Our usual preachers' meetings this year were opened 
by a three days' conference upon methods of work, 
when Pastor T'sie gave three most searching, helpful, 
and spiritual addresses ; indeed, I have seldom heard 
more so even from a foreigner. The first day his subject 
was, " How to explain the Scriptures." We give the 
merest skeleton of these addresses, (i) Knowledge 
of the Chinese character essential. (2) In speaking 
on the parables, first explain the story before giving 
figurative meaning. (3) Show clearly the plan of 
salvation, repentance, and faith Mark i. 15. (4) 
Give first principles of the doctrine ; then its use and 
application. (5) It is important not only to under- 
stand the Scriptures, but to have experienced oneself 
the truth one is seeking to impart. (6) Be careful 
to give the doctrines of Scripture, not one's own 
ideas. (7) Christ's words and His works and ex- 
ample the foundations of all your teaching. (8) Not 
only enunciate the truth, but seek to send home and 



3i6 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

apply them to the heart of both preacher and hearers. 
See Romans iv. 23, 24. 

Second day : " How to preach so as to lead men to 
Christ." (i) United prayer necessary Acts i. 14,15. 
For the answer, see Acts ii. 41. (2) Not only prayer 
but preaching necessary John i. 35-40. (3) Preach 
trusting in the power of the Holy Spirit to convict, 
following Christ's method in John iv. 16-19. (4) 
Have patience to teach and explain, as Christ in 
John iii. 3-21. (5) Sacrifice one's own time, comfort, 
&c., in order to lead others to the Lord Luke v. 
27-29. (6) Seek to be at peace with all, even out- 
siders Rom. xii. 18. (7) Examine oneself as to 
reality of faith, and with what object one is preaching, 
whether for money, for glory, &c., or for the salvation 
of precious souls Acts xix. 13-16. Third day: 
Acts xix. 23-41. Two lessons are here learned from 
Paul when in difficulties and persecutions. While 
contending for the truth, and never yielding there, 
yet he so conducted himself that the chief of Asia 
were his friends. We should show due respect to 
those in authority, and be considerate and yielding 
in all matters not affecting our religion verses 35-37. 
(2) We must be careful not to revile the idols or 
idol-worship, but to preach the truth ; when truth 
and light enter the soul, falsehood and darkness must 
fly. We should have fewer cases of persecution if we 
followed Paul's example in these things. 



"ENDURE HARDNESS" 317 

The subjects dealt with by the preachers were 
mostly parables, miracles, the life of Christ, &c., and 
we were greatly cheered by the able way many of 
these subjects were handled. A good portion of each 
day was spent in prayer, and the future seemed hope- 
ful, earnestness and humble confession characterising 
most of the prayers. It was a month of deep 
soul-searching and blessing, and was doubtless an 
inspiration throughout the year. 

During the Christmas week, when our missionary 
brethren from Bing-yie and Chu-chow were with us, 
the idea was started of building a cottage by the sea, 
or rather bay, within easy reach of Wenchow, as a 
sanatorium for the C.I.M. stations of Wenchow, Bing- 
yie, and Chu-chow. We began as early in the year as 
possible, hoping it might be ready by the summer ; 
but, alas ! for our hopes, it was not finished till 
September, owing to the difficulty and the expenses 
of transport. Much of my time, too, was spent in 
superintending details. The pastor was the only 
man able to help me, and he could not often be 
spared ; but I had a double object in spending a week 
or ten days at a time among men, bricks, and mortar. 
There were seven Christians among them, and, though 
they rested on Lord's days, they were too far off to 
attend any services, so I once or twice included 
Sunday. We had a short service every evening and 
three on Lord's day, a few of the village people 



318 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

attending, and I doubt if the same number of Testa- 
ments and hymn-books could be found among 
workmen in England as were piled in a convenient 
corner ready for use when the day's work was over. 

Our cottage will be a great boon as a quiet, cool 
place of rest for weary workers who cannot afford the 
time and expense of going to Che-foo ; indeed, it has 
already proved a great comfort, and I believe its use 
will be more and more apparent as the years roll by. 
It is built Chinese fashion, three rooms long and two 
deep, two bedrooms on either side, while in the 
centre is a good-sized sitting-room, behind it being 
a large pantry which could easily be converted into 
another room if needed ; there is a good verandah 
round three sides of the house, and a bath-room at 
either end ; at the rear is kitchen and servants' room ; 
in front there is a small garden, and a wall enclosing 
the whole ; behind are the everlasting hills, where we 
can walk for miles without meeting a soul, while 
stretching before us is the large expanse of waters, 
with large and small islands dotted about, and is about 
four hours' journey from Wenchow by native boat. 

It is furnished in simple cottage fashion, bamboo 
chairs and sofa, while packing-cases do duty for 
dressing-tables in each bedroom, covered by pretty 
art-muslin sent by kind friends from England ; short 
curtains on the windows to protect us from prying 
eyes, for during the first months we had many visi- 



" ENDURE HARDNESS " 3 J 9 

tors. The sitting-room is covered with Canton 
matting. When we go we take with us our photo- 
graphs and other knick-knacks to make it home-like, 
while the hills provide us with wild flowers and grasses. 

In the meantime Miss Whitford had become 
engaged to be married, and with the prospect of her 
going to another station came the necessity of some 
one to take her place. The request for one was 
responded to by sending two, and in the spring Miss 
Spink and Miss Williams arrived, the latter to take 
up the school, and the former more especially for 
country work ; but of course both had to commence 
studying the language, and Miss W. kindly decided 
to defer her marriage a few months until her successor 
should be more able to fill her place. 

1894. In the early months of the year Ba-zie and 
other stations were visited. In the former, six full 
and very encouraging days were spent. We visited 
fourteen villages (five of those were newly opened up 
to the gospel), in all of which there were Christians 
or inquirers. They told me of over ten persons who 
had themselves sought out the Christians and asked 
that a preacher might be sent to teach them. The 
silversmith accompanied me to all those places, but 
it grieved me to see that, although full of zeal, his 
addresses had too much of self to please God ; this 
characteristic clung to him to the end, and I have 
lately heard that he was called home suddenly, in the 



320 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

very midst of his rejoicing over a degree he had just 
bought. There was no doubt of his salvation, but the 
suddenness of his death and the circumstances made 
a profound impression on the church. He was seek- 
ing the honour that cometh from man rather than 
that which cometh from God. " Hold fast, that no 
man take thy crown." 

At the end of May I was called to O-dzing. One 
of the Christians was and had been suffering persecu- 
tion, another had sinned and was now ill and penitent, 
and it seemed as if my going would be a help all 
round. It was late in the season for such a long 
journey, but I trusted the Lord to give cloudy weather, 
and He gave it. Through the Lord's grace I was able 
to do what we hoped, except that the penitence of 
the poor woman was short-lived ; she had got under 
the power of the Roman Catholics, and soon after 
went over entirely to them, and has not yet been 
restored ; thus the promise of a most useful worker 
has been blighted. 

Two days before returning to the city I took a 
bad cold, which, with the extra fatigue, knocked me 
up altogether, and for more than a week I was unfit 
for any kind of work. I was conscious that steadily, 
though slowly, my health was giving way ; I was no 
longer able for the same amount of work as formerly, 
and I felt that, unless a more vigorous hand took up 
the reins, loss to the church must be the result, for, 



"ENDURE HARDNESS 341 

unless the leader is able to keep well in the front of 
every good work, the natives soon relax their ener- 
gies. I therefore asked the Director to send a suitable 
married man who would in time relieve me of the 
greater part of the responsibility. Such a request 
was not so easy to grant as might appear at first 
sight ; married men who have been a few years in 
China had their own stations and work which could 
not be left, while a new and inexperienced man was 
hardly suitable for the post, and so we had to wait. 
Again, in the beginning of August, while at the 
cottage, I was suddenly taken ill with an attack of 
cholera (not Asiatic), which led me aside for a few 
weeks ; and, just as I was getting convalescent, Miss 
B. and Miss S. took ill, also several of our natives, so 
we had almost a hospital. Cholera was raging in the 
city, and hundreds died daily in deep darkness. " Oh! 
God, when will light arise in their midst?" In all 
our sickness we were most kindly attended without 
charge by Dr. L. of I.M. Customs, who never spared 
himself while others needed his care. 

Hostilities between Japan and China had broken 
out, and the people were more or less excited, but, as 
the seat of war lay in the north, there seemed no 
cause for apprehension in our neighbourhood. In 
November Miss Stayner and Miss Spink had gone 
to the Tong-t'so district, where they expected to be 
three weeks visiting the different villages ; they 

22 



322 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

returned, however, in less than one week in a sad 
plight, dressed in borrowed native clothes, partly 
men's, and partly women's ; they looked such guys 
in their curious rig-out that we were forced to laugh 
in spite of our surprise and alarm. All had gone well 
with them until the Thursday before, when they 
reached a hamlet where there were a few Christians ; 
they were well received, and after evening prayers 
retired to rest. But I will leave Miss Stayner to tell 
her own story : 

" We started on Monday morning, the 3rd inst, for 
a journey across the river, and on Tuesday and 
Wednesday visited several villages, where we were 
received very well by the people, and nothing but 
quiet was experienced till Thursday night. On that 
evening, about six o'clock, we reached Du-Kang, a 
small lonely village right away on the hills, inhabited 
by only seven or eight families, all of the name of 
Chi. We were to stop that night at the house of a 
Christian family living about five minutes distant. 
We were accompanied from the previous village by 
our private servant, a Bible-woman, preacher, and 
two Christian men, who were all to stay in the same 
house. We were received well, and quite a number 
gathered for the service which was held about eight 
o'clock ; and soon after we retired to rest in a room in 
a loft, our Bible-woman and the woman of the house 
sleeping in an adjoining room, an open doorway leading 



" END URE tiA RDNESS " $1$ 

from one to the other, the men of the party sleeping 
downstairs. 

" About midnight we were aroused by great shout- 
ing and lights in the next room. A moment later 
our room was filled with a crowd of men (perhaps 
about a dozen) carrying flaming torches, who at once 
started pulling our clothes off the bed and emptying 
our provision basket. I attempted to speak to them, 
asking what they meant by this, but could not make 
myself heard ; and when I tried to hold on to our 
bed quilt, one man struck me on the hand with his 
bamboo stick, and held on a minute or so, but at last 
I got free. 

" The Bible-woman, who had been the first with the 
woman of the house to be attacked, had had some 
bracelets torn off her arms, and was also beaten with 
bamboo poles ; but somehow she managed to get 
through them to us, and while the robbers were busy 
going off with our things (for by this time we saw 
that resistance was useless) she led us by a door into 
another loft, and we escaped down the ladder and 
out by the next house on to the hill behind the 
village. We were barefooted, and with only our 
night-dresses on, the robbers having stolen all our 
other clothing, bedding, books, &c. We climbed up 
through the wet grass and brambles, over rocks and 
stones, and at last, when we thought ourselves on a 
tolerably safe place, sat down in the bushes to see 



34 'MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

how things would shape themselves. We must have 
remained there over an hour listening to the shouting 
and yelling, and watching the flaring lights as the 
men went from house to house beating down doors 
and walls, and expecting each moment they might 
come out to search for us. Some of the villagers had 
escaped to the opposite side of the ravine where we 
were sitting, and soon we heard them say the robbers 
had left. In a few minutes more they let off several 
volleys from their guns, signs of triumph, or perhaps 
to intimidate any from following them. A little later 
two of the Christian men came out with lanterns to 
search for us, and were rejoiced to find we had not 
been carried off by the banditti. Fortunately they 
were able to find shoes for us to put on, as our feet 
were so hurt we could not have got down barefooted. 
"We went back into the house, and remained up in 
the loft the rest of the night. The alarm had been 
given at the nearest village, Lao-o (about ten li dis- 
tant), and a number of men started after the robbers, 
but of course were unable to overtake them. The 
poor villagers had also suffered much. The robbers, 
they say, were armed with spears as well as guns, 
and the old man of the house where we were staying 
had his arms and side badly cut. The people's 
clothing, grain, some of the cows, and other animals 
were taken off, the women's ornaments being torn 
out of their ears, hair, and hands. 



" ENDURE HARDNESS " 325 

"But what was most serious of all, our servant 
named Ui-yi-foh, the son of the house, and another 
neighbour were nowhere to be found ; they were 
doubtless taken off by the banditti for the purpose 
of being held to ransom. Before dawn, the woman 
of the house and the Bible-woman having divested 
themselves of some of their clothing to give us, we 
started for the next village, Lao-o, one of the Chris- 
tians having gone some time before to try to get 
chairs for us. We had only got a little distance when 
we met eight of the Christian women ; from these we 
got a bundle of clothing they had brought ' for us. 
They had started off bravely with a lantern in the 
dark to walk all that distance, though their husbands 
had opposed their doing such a dangerous thing. 
We then took chairs down to the creek, which we 
reached about noon yesterday ; here we took a 
boat to the city, and arrived before daylight this 
morning. 

" To show that in this instance we have not done 
anything that might be considered dangerous or 
foolhardy, I may say that, though foreigners had not 
been in that particular hamlet before, the district 
round and just such lonely places have frequently 
been visited by Mrs. Stott and others, and no danger 
was apprehended by ourselves or any of the natives ; 
the people of the place have suffered most, having 
had nearly everything they possessed carried away. 



326 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

What the fate of our servant and the other two men 
may be we dare not think." 

A few days later some of our people came in with 
the further information that the robbers, being unable 
to carry off all their booty, left some of it on the 
hillside, and two of their number, returning to take 
possession, were captured by the people of another 
village seven miles off, and were bound by them. 
Soon after another messenger arrived from Si-k'ai, 
saying that the chief of the robbers, with some of 
the booty, had been caught there and bound. But 
the officials delayed so long that the villagers were 
compelled to set the captives free. We were very 
anxious as to the safety of our Christian servant ; we 
had received a message that he would be released 
upon our paying one hundred dollars ; later on the 
demands became less and less, until it was believed 
that he would be released on the payment of ten 
dollars, and I was urged to settle the matter thus by 
the native Christians. I pointed out, however, to 
them that even the smallest sum must not be given 
for such a purpose ; if we ransomed him we would 
never be safe, and not only our servants, but we 
ourselves liable to capture at any time ; we must 
therefore wait and pray. It seemed hard to keep 
our brother in bondage when a few dollars might 
set him free, but the principle involved was too 
great, and I was firm, although gladly would J 



"ENDURE HARDNESS" 327 

have given much more to see him once more 
amongst us. 

We frequently met together to pray that our 
brother might soon be released, that he should not 
suffer hunger or ill treatment while in bonds, and 
that he might have good opportunities of preaching to 
the robbers. All these requests were granted by our 
loving Father : one day, just as we had risen from 
prayer, and I had asked that while we were praying 
the answer might come, the captive walked in. A 
stranger to us in the city, with whom our servant had 
business dealings, heard of his capture, and having a 
brother living in the village where he was bound, 
interceded with his brother, and without our know- 
ledge they redeemed him for two dollars, he having 
been nearly three weeks in captivity. Oh, how our 
hearts did rejoice when we heard how they had 
listened to the gospel and treated him kindly, pro- 
viding sufficient straw to keep him warm ; the loss of 
the goods seemed as nothing. A little later the two 
other men were also released, but I do not know 
upon what terms. 

At the end of this year we had ten candidates for 
baptism ; a number were from a village across the 
river. They had been led and in some measure taught 
by a man who had been an inquirer for nearly six 
years ; he never seemed to make much progress, and 
was, I feared, more bent on proving his fitness for 



328 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

employment as a preacher, than soul winning. He 
was a man of some character, and it looked as if the 
candidates of the district would stand or fall by his 
decision ; some, therefore, were anxious for him to be 
baptized. There was no doubt that several of the 
others were truly converted, and it seemed hard to 
hinder them by not accepting him, and they were not 
prepared to stand independently ; when, therefore, he 
appeared with six others, including his own son, it 
was with the confident hope he would be received. 
But as I had reason to believe he expected to be 
employed as a preacher, I put him through a rather 
stiff examination, and pointed out that there was no 
hope of employment. He said he did not want that ; 
all he asked was to be sent out as a preacher, and get 
a dollar a month for expenses. I replied such a thing 
was impossible for two reasons. First, we never sent 
out newly baptized members as preachers. Second, 
our old and tried men only got fifty cents per month 
for their journeys ; and indeed I made it plain that 
though I should be glad for him to tell the gospel to 
as many as he could, I had no intention of sending 
him out as a preacher. At this he said, " In that case 
I would rather wait." His son, about twelve years of 
age, was very clear in his testimony, and so were the 
others, but they also withdrew, as they considered it 
not good form to be baptized before the one who had 
taught them. 



"ENDURE HARDNESS" 329 

It was soon apparent that the Lord had delivered 
us out of a snare, for there is now no doubt that had 
we received this man he would have caused much 
trouble ; and indeed he has tried in several ways to 
injure the work. Since then, several of those who 
withdrew have been baptized, though at that time 
only four out of the ten were received. 



CHAPTER XXII 
1895 

" Both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together." 
JOHN iv. 36. 

IN February, Mr. and Mrs. Woodman arrived in 
Shang-hai, from England. Mr. Taylor, who was 
on the look-out for a suitable couple to send to Wen- 
chow, recognised in them the ones most likely to 
fill the position, and without delay designated them 
for our city. They were most gladly welcomed, and 
ere long were fully installed not only in our home, but 
in our hearts also. They differed as to gifts, but both 
had that warm loving sympathy which won all hearts. 
They came at a busy time, for on the I2th of March 
I was to celebrate my jubilee, and at the same time 
complete my twenty-five years in China for it will be 
remembered I arrived on my twenty-fifth birthday. 
What a change had taken place in that time, the little 
one had literally become a thousand, and it seemed a 
most fitting opportunity for a day of thanksgiving. 
It was my intention that invitations should be 

33 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH" 331 

issued to all the church members, including those also 
in Dong-ling and Bing-yie, who had been received 
into church fellowship by my husband ; but our 
accommodation proving insufficient we were obliged to 
restrict ourselves to two in each family, where more 
than that number were in fellowship ; even then the 
invitations extended to over three hundred, sixty or 
seventy of whom would have to remain our guests for 
three days, because of the distance they must travel. 
Part of the programme was a Chinese feast, which is 
a necessary adjunct to all celebrations. Preparations 
on such a gigantic scale had to be begun betimes, so 
that the event was known and talked about months 
before. For some days every one wore an air of 
delighted mystery, which I attributed to the anticipa- 
tion of the coming event; on the nth the chapel 
was in the hands of many willing workers, who had 
taken upon themselves to decorate the building in 
true festive style. In the afternoon I went to see how 
they were progressing, when I was turned back and 
told I must not try to look in until I was invited to 
do so. I knew then some surprise must be in store 
for me, but never could have dreamed of anything so 
costly and beautiful as what they had devised. I 
had invited all the missionaries to supper on the 
Monday evening, knowing that Tuesday would be 
given up to the natives. About nine o'clock we were 
all invited into the chapel, to see, as I thought, how 



332 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

nicely the natives had decorated it : the sight nearly 
took away my breath ; there hung behind the platform 
a large satin banner, and scrolls to match, besides 
thirteen others, two in satin and silk, but all inscribed 
in gold letters. Many pairs of large red candles, and 
some other things, including a handsome pair of 
candlesticks of stags, the horns and hoofs gold plated. 
As soon as the pastor had hinted that it would be 
nice to present me with a banner, the Christians took 
it in such a hearty way, that he saw they meant to 
have it done in the best possible style ; hence such a 
costly present. A few days after, when asking him 
why he had allowed them to spend so much money 
upon me, he remarked, "If you had only seen the joy 
with which they brought their presents you would not 
be grieved ; " he had not intended anything so grand, 
but after everything was paid for, and even boxes 
added in which by and by to convey them to 
England, there were still ten dollars over. It was just 
wonderful the amounts those poor people gave, many 
of them hardly able to buy rice. That same even- 
ing I had another surprise, quite as great ; my dear 
fellow missionaries in Wenchow and Bing-yie, includ- 
ing those of the Methodist Free Church, united in 
presenting me with a lovely gold watch. It was just 
overwhelming that day, and even now I can hardly 
write about it without emotion. During the meetings 
every speaker referred to my beloved husband in the 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE TtiAT REAPEfti" 333 

most tender and loving way, showing how blessed his 
memory was. 

In the midst of the festivities one of the mandarin 
ladies, dressed in her official robes, with a four- 
bearers chair, came to offer her congratulations as 
a representative of the Yamen ladies, few of whom 
had ever seen me. The devotion of my cook, who 
had served me for fifteen years, touched me much ; 
he took all the work of providing for my numerous 
guests upon himself, at far less cost than I could 
have done, and worked almost night and day that 
the burden might not fall upon me. After all was 
over, and the guests gone, I called him into my study 
and told him that while I knew that money could 
not pay for the services he had rendered, yet, being 
pleased, I wished him to accept a little present to 
express my appreciation. He only answered, " If 
you are pleased, that is all I want." He took the 
money, but a little while after his wife, who was 
our first school-girl, came with a message that as 
he could not express what he wanted, he had sent 
her back to say that "they did not look upon 
themselves as servants ; I was both father and mother, 
and parents did not pay their children for doing their 
duty." Tears ran down her cheeks when she added, 
" When you are pleased we are pleased ; when you 
are troubled we are troubled ; when you are well we 
are well ; and when you are ill we are ill too." She 



334 MISSION WORK /Af CtfltfA 

then asked me to take back the money ; but I replied, 
" Mothers will sometimes give a gift to a child, and 
would feel hurt if it were returned." She then took 
it with a smile ; such devotion is humbling. I have 
done what I could, but others have done far more, 
and have received less, " to Him alone be the glory ! " 
Mr. Woodman, giving a touching and graphic de- 
scription of that wonderful day, writes as follows : 

" Just now, when so many eyes are turned towards 
this far-off land in the East, you will be glad to hear 
a little of the Lord's doings among His own people, 
I should like to describe, if possible, to you the events 
of one day, March I2th, in this city of Wenchow, 
with its eighty thousand or more population ; it is 
what we call in our own country a ' red-letter day,' 
the event being the fiftieth anniversary of Mrs. Grace 
Stott's birthday, and the completion of her twenty- 
fifth year of work here. Invitations had been issued 
to the Christians to gather for a day of thanksgiving 
and praise to God, and as many of them lived thirty 
and forty miles away, they arrived two days and 
even three days before, so as to be in time ; the large 
church and native quarters were taxed to their utmost 
powers of accommodation. It was most touching, as 
you walked about the compound, to see the Christians 
gathered about in little groups, studying the Word, 
or praying for a mighty outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit upon them and all who should be gathered 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH" 335 

together. All through the previous day the church, 
with its bare white-washed walls, had been in the 
hands of the native Christians, and at night, when all 
was finished, Mrs. Stott was sent for, to find waiting 
her surprises of their love, for on entering the place 
there hung a most beautiful and costly scarlet satin 
banner, with ornaments of silk tassels and fine polished 
jade stones, the gift of the church, speaking by its 
very beauty the depth of their gratitude and love to 
her who had led them to Christ, out of darkness into 
His marvellous light. In the finest gold characters 
there was inscribed upon it a very suitable inscription 
referring to Mr. and Mrs. Stott having been the first 
to bring them the good news of the gospel, with the 
quotation from Dan. xii. 3 linked to their names. 
Besides this, on all sides other scrolls and banners to 
the number of fifteen, tokens of individual love, chief 
among them being one from her girls' school on 
which was written I Kings iii. 9-13, in Chinese 
characters. One of the most touching gifts received 
were some very large Chinese red candles from her 
old blind men's home, which to them meant much 
from their poverty ; and last, but not least, there were 
four pairs of scrolls from the heathen tradesmen of 
the city, which perhaps spoke louder than any other 
thing of the value and result of a Christ-like life 
lived in the midst of heathen darkness and idolatry, 
especially when one remembers the terrible persecu- 



336 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

tion and narrow escapes of life which Mr. and Mrs. 
Stott passed through in previous years. 

"The morning of the I2th commenced with a service 
in the church at 10 a.m., and the sight that met one 
on entering was one that never could be forgotten by 
those who were privileged to see it ; the place was 
crowded to its very utmost extent by nearly four 
hundred Chinese Christians, whose bright and happy 
faces shone with the love of God in their hearts. 
* This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our 
eyes ' were the words that rose to our lips, and one's 
thoughts went back to the time, a little more than 
twenty-five years ago, when, among all the teeming 
thousands of Wenchow, there was not a single soul 
who knew of the true God, until one solitary man, 
Mr. Stott, filled with love for souls, came and settled 
in their midst and was joined two years later by his 
wife. One thought of those terrible first years, when 
the very people they came to befriend sought their 
lives, and in every way tried to drive them out by 
bitter persecution and opposition ; especially did one 
long that he who had spent and been spent for the 
salvation of these people might have been there to 
join in the thanksgiving. Truly heart and voice of 
all present united in the singing of the opening hymn, 
1 bless the Lord, my soul.' 

" The first word came from Mr. S., of the Methodist 
Free Church, who spoke all our thoughts by first re- 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH" 337 

ferring to Mr. Stott ; he said he wished he were present 
to share in the joy of that meeting, but it had seemed 
best to the all-wise God and Father to take him to 
Himself. ' But/ continued he, c perhaps God may 
tell him ; perhaps he knows all about us to-day. I 
would like to compare to-day with twenty-five years 
ago ; think of the difficulties then, the people sus- 
picious of the hated foreigners, and their opposition. 
Mr. Stott was the only foreigner here until Mrs. Stott 
joined him. Then they lived in a little three-roomed 
Chinese house.' He remembered hearing how ill Mrs. 
Stott was during one of those early years. ' Just think 
of her, the only foreign lady in the place ; what would 
some of you native women have done in such a case ? 
Would you not have grumbled to your husband, " Oh, 
why did you ever bring me to such a place as this, 
over twelve thousand miles, to dwell alone in a 
strange land ?" But Mrs. Stott stood bravely at her 
post encouraging her husband. Think of those early 
days, and the two first converts, now there are in the 
whole Wenchow prefecture (including Methodist Free 
Connexion) 1,050 persons in church fellowship. In 
addition there are two thousand men who meet regu- 
larly every Sabbath to worship say, in all, three 
thousand souls. I would ask you, first of all, to pray 
that Mr. and Mrs. Stott's example may be followed, 
and I am sure in twenty-five years more the three 
thousand will be thirty thousand. Just twenty-five 

23 



338 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

years ago worship was held in the centre room of Mr. 
Stott's little three-roomed house ; now there are sixty 
districts where regular Sunday services are conducted. 
I would ask you all to use your life, your possessions, 
your abilities in spreading the gospel ; let every act of 
your life be a service to God for the spread of the 
gospel.' 

" Then followed a deeply touching address from Mr. 
Tsie, the native pastor, one whom Mr. Stott had 
taught and trained, of which we can only give brief 
notes, but as we listened to words which spoke of a 
man filled with the Holy Ghost, taught by God, again 
we felt, ' What hath God wrought ' ! He said, ' What 
is the meaning of all this ? It is not Sunday, as some 
outsiders might think ; no, to-day Mrs. Stott is cele- 
brating her fiftieth birthday, and we have come here 
to rejoice with her, and give her our presents and 
congratulations. But what is our great object in thus 
assembling to-day ? When we look back over the last 
twenty-five years and think of all God has done for 
Wenchow, we are led to meet together to give glory 
to God. Look at i Thess. i. 2-3 and I Thess. ii. 1-4, 
9 ; this, too, might be written of them, for at that 
time we, in our ignorance thinking ourselves superior 
to any country, persecuted and shamefully ill-treated 
them ; but such things did not dishearten them, they 
were bold to speak unto us the words of life. To- 
day we see the results, but I know I shall only echo 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH " 339 

Mrs. Stott's sentiments when I say ' Let all the glory 
be to God.' 

" It was now the writer's privilege, as one who had 
so recently come to live and work among them, to 
say a few words. * First a word as to the past ; let it 
be Psa. cxxvi. 3, " The Lord hath done great things 
for us whereof we are glad " ; then a word as to the 
future, Joel ii. 21, "Fear not, O land; be glad and 
rejoice : for the Lord will do great things " ; which- 
ever way we look, past or future, we have cause for 
great rejoicing.' 

" Mr. G., from the Bing-yie Church, an outcome of 
the Wenchow work, then spoke. He referred to the 
past twenty-five years as a picture from Rom. xiii. 12. 
First the dark night of Mr. and Mrs. Stott's coming ; 
then the bright starlight night, the stars coming out 
gradually one by one. ' Therefore sprang there even 
of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the 
stars of the sky in multitude' (Heb. xi. 12); and 
lastly there has come the clear full moonlight, the 
church now lighting up the darkness of the night 
around, waiting until the day dawns and the Sun of 
Righteousness arise with healing in His wings.' One 
thing only is to be dreaded, the clouds of sin hinder- 
ing the light of the moon. 

" The meeting was closed by a few remarks from 
Mrs. Stott herself, the rapt attention of the whole 
church proving how deep a hold she had on their 



340 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

hearts' affections. Mrs. Stott commenced by saying, 
* Never had I a harder thing to do than to speak to 
you to-day. I am in a strait ; my heart longs to speak, 
but my tongue almost refuses to utter the words. 
Last night when I saw your beautiful present, Mr. S. 
well expressed my sentiment when he said, " When I 
looked at your precious gift I saw not it, but your 
hearts." I knew before that you loved and honoured 
me, but did not know how deeply that love went, 
until I saw the expression of it in that gift. You 
have been as children with a mother, listening to my 
counsel and following my advice, and I thank you for 
all your loyal devotion, but when I hear all that has 
been said about my twenty-five years' labour among 
you, I feel unworthy, and others ought to be here to 
share the honour. My one thought is let us give all 
the glory to God, the work has been His and the 
power of service too ; comparisons have been made 
between the past and the present, and we rejoice 
together over the hundreds that have been saved ; 
but who have been the means of their salvation? 
You, my brethren, and my sisters you have carried 
the message of salvation to your friends and neigh- 
bours, into towns and villages, and souls have been 
won. If only those whom I have personally led to 
Christ were here, how few there would be ; it is true 
I have been your teacher instructing you in the Word 
of God. In thanking you all for the rich gifts you 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH" 341 

have presented to me last night, and in which you all 
have had a share, I must refer to two others that have 
especially touched my heart. Look at that scroll, the 
gift of the school girls ; they have little money of their 
own, it must have taken months of saving ; and these 
large candles the gifts of the blind men, out of their 
deep poverty they have offered them. May I say in 
closing, that the one desire of our hearts is that God 
may be glorified in our midst, and that souls may be 
saved, may we live and work together for this object 
alone ! ' 

" We knelt in heartfelt praise and prayer, and then 
there burst out the grand praise note of the doxology 
with an earnestness and fervour that even in our own 
dear homeland is seldom heard. We broke up, to 
gather again in happy fellowship over a real Chinese 
feast, and the much to be remembered day was 
brought to a close by an evening meeting, when, 
among others, two of Mr. Stott's old schoolboys, 
both of them preachers of the gospel, spoke of the 
days gone by, lovingly referring to that life which, in 
its beauty and patience, and its intense love, had done 
so much for so many of them gathered there one 
reference to I Cor. iv. 15 being especially touching, 
showing how dear he was to them still : indeed, the 
thought of him was as a gold thread running through 
every memory of the past, 'who being dead yet 
speaketh.' The whole was brought to a conclusion 



342 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

by Mr. Menzies (of Bing-yie) urging that as the day 
had been a feast of fat things, not to forget to send 
portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared. 
May we ask the prayers of all who read this simple 
testimony of the Lord's goodness, that in the days to 
come our God may do still more wonderful things for 
us." 

" Along with the photograph of the banner I ap- 
pend the translation : 

(Inscription on Banner.) 
"'ON MRS. STOTT'S FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY.' 

" Dan. xii. 3. We hear of light as of the gracious 
stars, but God's own light has shone into many of 
these far-distant lands. Those who have received 
this light are joyful, and sing everlasting songs of 
praise. Our Zoa Sz-mo (Mrs. Stott), with her 
husband, Pastor Ngo-dji-Zoa (Mr. Stott), were the 
first to come to Wenchow to preach the holy 
doctrine of Jesus. When they had newly come, 
and the gospel had not yet been preached abroad, 
they were very badly treated by some, who, without 
any reason whatever, maligned them in every way 
possible all which they bore most patiently. After- 
wards, trusting in God's help, they were at last able 
to reach the country districts with the gospel. Later 
on Mr. and Mrs. Stott together returned to England. 



"HE THAT SOWETH AND HE THAT REAPETH" 343 

From there Mr. Stott was called home to heaven ; 
but Mrs. Stott, understanding what the mind of the 
Lord was, and in accordance with her husband's 
desire, again returned, remembering all the Wenchow 
Christians, and not hesitating at the thought of the 
long sea-voyage, and perils, and discomforts she 
would have to endure if she came back to Wenchow, 
in accordance with the promise which had formerly 
been made to the Church. While in Wenchow she 
set herself to teach the Church members, and to 
feed them with spiritual food. It is now well nigh 
ten years since she began this work. And now in 
Wenchow-fu, 10 hsiens, and all the districts round 
about, there are many white-haired old men, besides 
young men and numbers of women, who have all 
heard the gospel and received her instruction. I, 
Tsang Ts'e (the Pastor), with many others, have 
for years been taught by her, and we have learned 
to love and respect her much. To-day we are cele- 
brating her birthday, and have prepared a banner 
to present to her, which may be compared to that 
jewel in the old story which the grateful bird sought 
and picked up to present to the master who had 
found the poor little fledgling and had fed and 
nourished it ever since. All those who met together 
to consider the idea of presenting the banner were 
only too delighted to put it into execution. On the 
eventful day the chapel and compound were opened 



344 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

wide and beautifully decorated ; the Christians all 
met from the city and different districts round about, 
and spent the time in singing joyful hymns, and 
praying God to bless Mrs. Stott and spare her to 
us till her hundredth year. 

(Right-hand Scroll.) 

"In her twenty-fifth year [Mrs. Stott] sailed to 
China : in, as it seems, a moment's time she has 
reached her fiftieth birthday. 

(Left-hand Scroll.) 

" During these couple of decades great grace has 
come to us from God. The gospel has spread. We 
congratulate her on her birthday, and pray that from 
to-day she may have long life." 




Banner presented to Mrs. Stott by the Native Church of Wenchow on 
March i2th, 1895, the completion of her twenty-five years' work 
in their midst. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

" Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no 
more that they can do." LUKE xii. 4. 

FOLLOWING this happy day came sorrows 
thick and fast ; indeed, in looking back upon 
the year (1895), it was the one bright gleam in the 
midst of a cloudy sky. Seldom has so much sorrow 
been crowded into one year as we experienced in 
this, and one can but adore the wonderful grace and 
sustaining power of our God, who doeth all things 
well. He is good and doeth good, is the language 
of our hearts. 

During the summer a very serious persecution 
broke out in the district of Shiae-koa-diu, an out- 
station from Bing-yie, where there were a goodly 
number of inquirers. A man still heathen was ill, 
and as his family feared he might die, they called 
upon the preacher and a few of the inquirers to pray 
for his recovery. On entering the house the preacher 
saw an idol there, and remarked that he could not 
pray to the living God while it occupied the place 

345 



346 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

of honour. The family were afraid themselves to 
take it away, bMt asked the evangelist to do so, 
which he did. Whether this incident gave rise to 
false reports we do not know, but on the i8th of 
June a band of men went to the house of an in- 
quirer, an old man, and accused him of taking out 
the eyes of an idol near by, threatening to bind 
him hand and foot and carry him to the temple ; 
instead, however, they went to the house of a scholar, 
who is the head of the clan, and obtained from him 
a flag as an insignia of authority. They then, with 
the accompaniment of gongs and drums, again pro- 
ceeded to the old man's house ; he, however, escaped 
and made his way to the chapel. The third son was 
ill, and so unable to escape, and him they kicked and 
ill-treated. 

On the matter being reported to Mr. M., who was 
in charge, he sent the pastor to inquire into the 
matter, but, on nearing the place, found he darecl 
not proceed further, owing to the serious turn affairs 
had taken ; he learned that the people were banding 
themselves by hundreds, and were inciting to riot, 
determining to turn out all who professed Chris- 
tianity, and burn down their houses. Mr. M. then 
communicated with the magistrate, who at once 
sent out runners, who, however, never reached the 
place of trouble, having, no doubt, been bribed by 
the rioters to say there was no disturbance of any 



"BE NOT AFRAID" 347 

importance. On the 2Oth, at N-so district, the local 
constable informed the preacher that some men were 
accusing him of taking out the eyes of the idols, and 
meant to lay hands on him ; he therefore advised the 
preacher to leave the place at once ; but he decided to 
remain, as to fly would seem to confess himself guilty 
of the charge brought against him. An hour or two 
later he was seized by a band of men, bound hand 
and foot, and carried to the seaside, with the view of 
throwing him into the water ; the constable, however, 
appeared on the scene just in time to save him from 
the hands of the mob, but an inquirer who stood by 
was badly beaten. 

On the 24th, at another village named Dzing-ko-to, 
the constable of the place, instead of exhorting the 
people to keep the peace, and using his authority to 
this end, led on and incited a band of men with the 
same cry of " idols defaced," and the mob were not 
appeased until they had entirely demolished two of 
the young Christians' houses. By this time the whole 
neighbourhood was in an uproar. The 2/th was the 
annual dragon festival of the village O-chie, which 
included a boat race. The crew who were beaten 
in the contest charged the only Christian in the place 
with defacing the idols, hence their defeat. They 
beat him and partly destroyed his house. These 
cases were duly reported to the magistrate, who sent 
out his runners, but with no good result. 



348 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

On Saturday the 29th, matters came to a crisis, 
when the rioters commenced a wholesale work of 
destruction. In the early morning a large band of 
men proceeded to the village of Shiae-Koa-du, and 
levelled our new chapel to the ground, also the house 
and property of the pastor, who had just time to 
entrust his wife and family to a kind neighbour, and 
fly to Bing-yie with the news. Immediately on hear- 
ing of this fresh outbreak, Mr. M. duly communicated 
with the local officials and asked for an interview, 
which was granted. The mandarin promised to do 
his best to put down the rioting, and an official, with 
a body of soldiers and runners, at once left for the 
scene of the outbreak. Meanwhile, the rioters busied 
themselves by pulling down and burning the houses 
of the Christians, so that by the same evening five 
houses had been destroyed, and by the following 
morning (Sunday) the number had increased to 
eleven, and by Wednesday twenty houses had been 
partly or utterly destroyed. The inmates made their 
way to Bing-yie, where no fewer than fifty-nine men, 
women, and children were thrown upon Mr. M.'s re- 
sources, the majority of them having nothing more 
than the clothes they were wearing. The officials 
and soldiers, who had gone to quell the disturbance, 
returned the following evening without doing any- 
thing to restore order, and on the 3Oth Mr. M. again 
visited the magistrate, when he dolefully confessed 



"BE NOT AFRAID" 349 

that he was powerless ; the outbreak was too large 
for him to cope with, but he offered to issue official 
notices to the scholars of the district, and lay upon 
them the responsibility of putting a stop to the riot. 
He also promised to restore to the Christians all that 
had been destroyed by the rioters. 

On Thursday, July 4th, another large and newly 
built house, in which a family of sixteen had only lived 
two months, was destroyed, and without a moment's 
warning the inmates were cast adrift, without a roof 
over their heads. Another Christian in the same 
place saved his house and goods through the efforts 
of a literary man ; twice the mob assembled for the 
purpose of destruction, and twice were restrained by 
the scholar, who called upon them to go with him to 
the temple, and he would show them that the face of 
the idol was eaten by rats, and the defacement was 
not the work of man ; but though the house was left, 
the occupant, with his wife and aged mother, had to 
make their escape at midnight and join the outcasts 
at Bing-yie. 

A fresh outcry was then raised of more idols being 
deprived of their eyes. A crowd gathered to discuss 
the question, but as no one had been seen committing 
this outrage, it was determined to ask the idol himself. 
A man in the crowd was chosen to represent him ; 
the priest wrote certain characters, or incantations, 
burned the paper over the man's head, thus trans- 



350 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

forming him into the idol, which was minus its eyes. 
He was asked who had stolen his eyes, and the man 
immediately replied, "Those who have believed the 
foreign doctrine." Of course this was to them con- 
clusive, no other evidence being required. 

The damage done during that terrible fortnight 
amounted to nearly five thousand dollars. This was 
a great trouble and anxiety to Mr. M., who had had 
but little experience of such ways. We shared the 
burden and helped him as best we could, and the 
English Consul took up the matter, and eventually 
brought about a settlement, and indemnity for their 
losses was given ; but months elapsed before their 
houses could be rebuilt and the people return to their 
work. 

Following these came troubles nearer home. One 
of the stations of the Methodist Free Church was the 
scene of a most determined attack against Christianity. 
One Sunday morning, while the people were assembled 
for worship, a band of rowdies made an attack, scattered 
the assembled people, broke lamps, seats, etc., and 
threatened to expel from the village any who should 
join this religion. It was long before any steps were 
taken to redress this wrong, and as the Bing-yie 
troubles were not at that time settled, a spirit of bold 
defiance was manifested in other places. In one 
village, just across the river, where we had conducted 
services for years, a most determined opposition was 



"BE NOT AFRAID" 351 

set up ; the villagers refused to allow the Christians 
to have meetings even in their own houses, and each 
attempt was met with personal threats and stone 
throwing. They plainly intimated that any house 
thus used should be pulled down, and the occupant 
expelled, though no charge whatever was made against 
the Christians. It seemed monstrous that the laws 
which gave perfect freedom and toleration to all 
religions, should be thus defied under the very eyes 
of the officials. Their attention was called to the 
matter, when they politely asked me to defer our 
sending preachers for a few weeks, until the excite- 
ment of the Bing-yie troubles was over. I complied 
with this request, but at the same time pointed out 
that the settlement of the case would be more difficult 
later on, as the seeming victory of the opponents 
would embolden them and others, and I put the 
responsibility of future disturbances upon them. 

A few weeks after we made another attempt with 
a like result, stones and mud were freely thrown, and 
the meeting broke up in noise and confusion. The 
mandarins either would not or could not maintain 
order, and the villagers, feeling their power, waxed 
bolder. So far as I know, services have not yet been 
resumed in that place. 

Mrs. Menzies and baby, with Miss B., were in the 
meantime at the cottage for the summer months, and 
so she mercifully was spared much of the trouble and 



352 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

anxiety her husband was in, and part of the time she 
was so ill that it was not deemed advisable to tell her 
how serious matters were. At the end of September, 
I joined them, hoping to rest a fortnight, but had only 
been there one week when the terrible news of the 
massacre at Ku-chang reached us. That tragic story 
filled us with horror, and as Fu-chow is the next 
province, south of us, the Consul felt somewhat 
alarmed, and ordered us to return at once to the 
city, which order we reluctantly obeyed, as we felt 
really safer where we were. I had only returned 
about a week when my health thoroughly broke 
down. For months I had been steadily failing, and 
the hope of staying a few years longer in Wenchow 
vanished, but I expected that with cooler weather a 
measure of health would return, so that I might be 
enabled to visit the country stations, introducing Mr. 
and Mrs. W. to what we hoped would be their future 
work. Then I thought, if the Lord should will it so, 
I might leave in the spring. " My ways are not as 
your ways," saith the Lord. 

The preachers had come in to their autumn week 
of study. Feeling unequal to the task, I had asked 
the pastor to conduct the first day's meetings, promis- 
ing that I should be there. At the close of the after- 
noon meeting, although taking no part, I became so 
prostrate, that my fellow-workers became uneasy, and 
called in the doctor. Work was at once prohibited, 



"BE NOT AFRAID" 353 

and in less than a week after, I was ordered to Eng- 
land without delay, and was told that I must not 
attempt many good-byes. The news of my coming 
departure filled the dear natives with concern, as Mr. 
and Mrs. W. were not yet able to speak the language, 
and there was no one of experience to fill my place ; 
but when they were told that it meant either going 
now or the probability of not being able to return, 
they said, like the sorrowing disciples of old, " The 
will of the Lord be done." When I heard the people 
were disappointed at the thought of not seeing me 
again, I sent a message that, if they could restrain 
their feelings, I would try and come to the chapel on 
Sunday morning and see them all once more. As 
might be expected, the place was full, and as I was 
carried on to the platform the sight of the red eyes 
of my dear women nearly took from me the little 
courage I had left ; many prayers were going up that 
I might have power given to speak to them once 
more, and for nearly ten minutes I was strengthened 
to give the message which the Lord had given me 
the day before, after which I was again carried down, 
when the whole congregation stood and, without a 
sign of emotion, watched me out of sight. 

The following day I received a message from them 
that they would do as I desired ; they would not 
come to the steamer, or make any attempt to see me 
again, but would pray every day for my return, and 

24 



354 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

then come en masse and carry me home in triumph. 
A few days before, the preachers came to my room, 
when I was able to speak a few farewell words and 
present each of them with a complete copy of the 
Bible in Chinese, which was received with many tears. 
Mr. and Mrs. Menzies, who could not bear the thought 
of Miss B., who accompanied me, and I leaving with- 
out their seeing us once more, were told they had 
better not come in, as I was too weak to bear the 
excitement, so instead of seeing us off, as they had 
hoped, they had to send their adieus by letter. 



CHAPTER XXV 

" I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because Thou didst it."~ 
PSA. xxxix. 9. 
"As for God, His way is perfect." 2 SAM. xxii. 31. 

ON the evening of September i8th we went on 
board our Wenchow steamer, where most of 
our foreign friends assembled to say good-bye, and 
the following morning at daybreak we started for 
Shang-hai. Little did we then think of the cloud 
that was about to burst over our loved friends left 
behind. I was able to send a tiny farewell note to 
each, and Mrs. Woodman's reply, received before 
starting for Japan, and probably the last she ever 
penned, was so touching in its loving devotion to and 
trust in the Lord that I offer no apology for inserting 
it here : 

"WENCHOW, September 28, 1895. 
" MY DEAREST MRS. STOTT, Thank you very 
much for our bit of yourself ; it told the story that 
you were a little better, and indeed you ought to be, 
and you would think so could you have heard the 
volume of prayer that went up for you both, as a 

355 



356 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

sweet smelling savour unto God, on Saturday evening 
and Sunday morning. But I will try and do my chat 
decently and in order, though C. will bring all news ; 
still, I want you to hear it from my lips as well, and 
in my way. 

" We came back from the ship feeling we had 
taken a large slice of our life out and put it outside 
the city gates on board that vessel, and my husband 
has, among other fresh complaints against me, the 
one of starting up in bed with some tale of a man 
opening the shutters ; he got out and went to the 
window, and succeeded in overturning the large lamp, 
waking up servants and household by the crash ; we 
felt after that we had really done something to herald 
in our taking charge. 

"The next day we became too busy to think, 
especially as the work-people arrived to commence 
proceedings. C. and K. helped splendidly, and by 
night we had put away even the odds and ends that 
reminded us of you; for another purpose we will have 
another such day when we make ready to receive you 
back again. Since that one day of clearing up we 
have steadily gone in an opposite direction, and to- 
night ' confusion worse confounded ' reigns ; the 
stairs, destroyed by white ants, are strewed in pieces 
about the passage ; the sitting-room is not at home ; 
instead, a carpenter's shop seems to have taken its 
place ; and the study is a bare, blank place, having 



"HIS WAY IS PERFECT" 357 

its walls done ; still, as we understand the joy of 
meeting far better after parting, the love of home 
after the far country, so we shall revel in the comfort 
of our house after its discomfort and mess, and I 
want, if possible, to be able to welcome K. and C. 
back with us and our surroundings in our right mind. 
Am I writing trifles ? Well, I want to write to you 
as I write to mother, who says, * Tell me down to the 
smallest detail.' 

" Now for the other side. The prayer-meeting had 
you all in spirit with us, I am sure. May God use 
that meeting time, week by week, to be the hand that 
shall open windows of blessing here; and wherever 
you are, somehow I felt that last Friday evening you 
were among us in the quiet communion service, that 
the Lord just took the links of love that united us 
and riveted them afresh, placing upon each one 
the seal of His love again. Then, and now, I thank 
Him for doing this ; I thank Him with all my heart 
that He has let my husband's life and my own cross 
yours and A.'s, and that He has made them richer by 
your love. 

"Saturday was another full, busy day. For one thing 
I was rather alarmed by having great requests for 
medicine. They evidently thought A.'s mantle must 
have fallen on some one, and my reputation went 
abroad as the one, when I gave a simple dose to a 
woman who pleaded for it for her daughter, and who 



358 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

arrived back full of glee at the cure. Many came in 
from the country, and it was what well-nigh every day 
is, a fresh rinding out of weakness and helplessness. 
Seven applied for baptism, with a probable three 
more ; later on in the afternoon, three from Koa-diu, 
among whom was the policeman's son, and the others 
from Yung-ko-djiae. My husband decided it was far 
better to wait for the pastor's return, and just had 
them in, and asked them if they would come next 
month, telling them it was your wish this should be 
done. They were quite willing, and we heard them 
say, as they left, 'Yes, that is right: God first, then 
Zoe-Sz-mo.' 

"The prayer-meeting at night was an earnest, 
powerful time. The new shepherd summoned up 
courage for a couple of Chinese sentences ; Zing-Lie 
prayed, that as freely as he drank Wenchow water, 
might he drink in the Wenchow words. Then, as we 
had no baptisms, my husband thought it would be 
very nice to start Sunday with a prayer-meeting, and 
asked them to gather together at nine, especially 
remembering you and A. The chapel was full, and 
eight or nine prayed quite rapidly, with very full 
hearts I am sure, for the absent ones. We had a 
crowded communion, but all passed off quietly and 
well. I fear the strange faces must keenly have 
reminded them of their loss : love begets love, though, 
so I pray steadily on for a great love towards each 



"HIS WAY IS PERFECT" 359 

one, and then I know they will by and by learn to love 
us back. 

"Monday brought us an unexpected bit in the arrival 
of Mr. and Mrs. M. and baby. The little fellow is 
very poorly, such a little white-faced boy, and they 
were anxious to put him under the doctor's care. 
He is evidently upset by his food, and thoroughly out 
of order. You know how easily Mrs. M. makes her- 
self at home, so I have scarcely felt having them at 
all ; only the house is in such a mess for them. Mr. 
M. left last night, leaving his wife and child behind 
until the latter is well. Things are not very peaceful 
in Bing-yie yet ; they beat and ill-used twenty going 
to the Mo-z-ka. 

" I went down to the South Gate, on Wednesday, 
with Liu-sy-mo, a nice meeting place, but I missed A 
very much ; somehow it was not the same to me : I 
don't know how the natives felt. Everything in the 
church is quite quiet. We have had a request from 
the Yung-ko-djiae people, to allow them to have a 
house or place taken for meetings. They will give 
four dollars a year towards expenses : there are four 
wishing to join them, interested through Dr. Hogg 
and his ministrations. We told them the matter 
should be seen into when T'sie came back. Now I 
have, I think, told you all. * Pray for the peace of 
Jerusalem.' * God will do the best for those who leave 
the choice to Him.' He knows the under-currents of 



360 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

life, and this work is dearer to Him than it is to us. 
Don't you think He watches over Wenchow with a 
jealous love, and says, ' Here have I commanded my 
blessing.' We shall be able to plead with Him that 
strong prayer, ' For Thy name's sake. 1 And now, 'God 
be with you till we meet again.' I have such a nice 
word which I have been connecting with your name, 
1 Thou shalt have joy and gladness,' * For ye shall go 
out with joy, and be led forth with peace.' May the 
dear home country mean to you rest, strength, and 
gladness. Thank you, again and again, for your 
lovingkindness to us. Our first months in China have 
been happy ones indeed, by your goodness and love. 
The old place in the hearts of these people, 'the 
Mother's corner ' here is being ' kept for thee.' Our 
prayers will follow you step by step, wherever you go 
they shall form a three fold cord, with * goodness and 
mercy.' Take this letter as from both of us : we are 
one in Christ. Our fond love. Oh the blessing of the 
Lord that maketh rich be yours richly. 
" Ever yours lovingly, 

"FANNY WOODMAN." 

Eleven days later, she, with her husband and the 
others, entered into the full atmosphere of love, where 
she ever seemed, while here, to dwell. Before going 
to China, Mr. and Mrs. W. had been for some years 
engaged in Christian service in connection with a 



"HIS WAY IS PERFECT" 361 

soldiers' home at Lichfield. Their work had been 
wonderfully owned of God ; many souls were saved, 
and Christians helped and encouraged to more earnest 
devotion. Sincere were the heart regrets of the men 
at their leaving, as letters written by them afterwards 
proved. To some it seemed a mistake to leave a 
work they were so well fitted for, and in which God 
was blessing them ; but they heard the call, " Go ye," 
and that to them meant going. Nor do I believe 
they ever regretted, for one moment, the step ; and 
had they known the issues, they would still have gone 
in simple obedience. But the few months were not 
lived in vain, for our lives have been made the richer 
for knowing them, and our love, hope, and sympathy 
increased by their example. The friendship and 
intercourse, though so short, will ever be a sweet and 
hallowed memory. " They were lovely and beautiful 
in their lives, and in their death they were not 
divided." 

At the time we left Wenchow, cholera was raging 
in many parts of the city, especially outside the East 
Gate, where several hundreds had died ; but, as this 
was an almost yearly occurrence, no special uneasi- 
ness was felt, while medicines were freely given by 
our people to the sufferers. As mentioned in Mrs. 
W.'s letter, Mrs. M. had come in to Wenchow, on 
Monday, Sept. 23rd, with her baby boy poorly ; but 
as it was thought to be nothing more than indigestion 



362 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

caused by change of food, there was no alarm felt, 
even by the parents ; and on Friday Mr. M. returned 
to his station, although much weakened by the 
anxious strain of the past few months, leaving Mrs. 
M. and her baby to complete the convalescence. 
However, on the evening of Sunday, 29th, the dear 
little fellow was taken ill with undoubted symptoms 
of cholera, and after a night of extreme suffering, his 
little spirit was welcomed by the Saviour who said, 
" Suffer the little ones to come unto Me." Mr. M. 
was recalled, but only returned in time to commit the 
precious dust to the earth. 

On Tuesday, symptoms of the dread disease de- 
veloped in the girls' school, and on Oct. 2nd (next 
day) two died within two hours of each other. On 
the 3rd, one of our old women on the premises was 
attacked, and died soon after, leaving a bright testi- 
mony of her clear confidence and faith in Christ her 
Saviour. 

The following day, 4th, another school-girl died, 
also an old man. These cases were lovingly nursed 
by Mrs. W. and Miss S. who did all in their power 
for the relief of the poor sufferers. By this time there 
was a panic in the school, all wanted to fly from the 
presence of death and danger ; and by the evening of 
that day the last of the girls had been taken to their 
homes by their friends. 

On Sunday, 6th, Mr. M. showed symptoms of the 



"HIS WAY IS PERFECT" 363 

disease, and after twenty- four hours' suffering, he too 
passed into the presence of the King. 

And so our dear sister was doubly bereaved, and 
left alone after less than two years of a singularly 
happy married life. Bravely, and with most remark- 
able trust in the perfect will of God, she drank the 
bitter cup, never so much as questioning the love that 
had dealt such a heavy blow. 

Mr. W., who had been suffering for a few days pre- 
viously, now manifested the disease, though still 
hopes were entertained of his recovery, as he rallied 
two or three times and lingered longer than either of 
the others : but, by Tuesday, 8th, all hope was gone. 
The same day, fully realising her husband's danger, 
Mrs. W. met the doctor with a peculiar smile, saying, 
" I too have taken it." She was advised to lie down 
at once, but, with characteristic unselfishness, she 
waited to put things in order, as she did not expect 
to recover. Early on the morning of the Qth, she too 
passed away, and her husband a few hours later ; so 
death and desolation reigned. Before she was taken 
ill she devoted herself with untiring energy to the 
care of others, and when Mr. M. was attacked, she put 
her arms round Mrs. M., and said, " Gladly would I 
give up my laddie to save yours, because you have 
lost your baby." 

Mrs. M. and Miss S., together with Drs. Hogg and 
Lowry, nursed the dear invalids night and day, and 



364 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

all that skill and love could devise was done. Our 
Father had need of them, and we are silent. They 
rest in His glory, and wait until that day when Christ 
shall bring them with Him, for they without us shall 
not be made perfect. We, too, rest and wait ; rest in 
the perfect will of God, and wait until we shall be 
caught up to meet them in the air, so shall we ever be 
with the Lord : " Even so, come Lord Jesus." 

While all this scene of sorrow and death was being 
enacted at Wenchow, Pastor T'sie and the cook, when 
returning from Shang-hai, suffered shipwreck, the 
steamer they were in, from some cause or other, 
having gone on the rocks, and for a time they were 
in imminent danger, but ultimately a Chinese gun- 
boat, seeing their distress, rendered what help they 
could, and brought the passengers to Wenchow. 
Thus they were mercifully preserved. 

After a fortnight spent in Shang-hai, during which 
time sleep and strength were slowly returning, we 
sailed for England, via C.P.R., which route the doctor 
had advised for me. Misses S. and W., seeing us off, 
all in utter ignorance of what was going on then at 
the dear home we had left behind. 

We had not been many days at sea when I was 
able to walk the length of the deck, and ere we 
reached Vancouver there had been more progress 
made than even the most sanguine had expected. 
After a few happy days spent at Toronto and 



"HIS WAY IS PERFECT" 365 

Montreal, we went to New York, and there suddenly 
and without any warning were told that a telegram 
had reached London that Mr. M. and the W.'s had 
been called home through cholera. 

The news was astounding, and yet even then we 
did not know the full extent of the blow. That was 
a dreary week across the Atlantic. We clung to the 
hope that a mistake had been made in the reading 
of the telegram and that at least only one of the W.'s 
had been taken. But on arrival we found that not 
the half had been told, for instead of three, which we 
thought the extent of our loss, we found that nine 
foreigners and natives had in ten days been carried 
off by the hand of death from our compound ; and 
yet how much of mercy and of lovingkindness has 
been revealed to us in this. My illness, which seemed 
so inopportune, occurring when I could least be spared, 
was the very cause of myself, Misses B., S., and W. 
being absent, beside the pastor, who is a delicate 
man, and might readily have fallen a victim, thus 
fewer lives were sacrificed than might otherwise have 
been the case. It has been said, " God buries His 
workers, but carries on His work." God can do 
without us, but He does not, and it is still true that 
" through the foolishness of preaching " He saves 
men. Who will be His ambassadors, and carry His 
message even to the uttermost parts of the earth? 
The dark places of the earth are still full of the 



366 MISSION WORK IN CHINA 

habitations of cruelty ; and yet the missionary's life 
is one of surpassing joy, for who has ever tasted a 
delight more intense than that of seeing souls born 
into the kingdom, and perhaps no country has given 
larger results for the amount of labour bestowed than 
China. It is true that as a nation the people are 
dirty, treacherous, and in many instances cruel ; but 
while they have these and other unlovely national 
characteristics, I can bear testimony to a warmth of 
devotion, fidelity, and patient endurance, not ex- 
ceeded by any country, not even by our own beloved 
England; and I still hope to spend my remaining 
years in their midst, though much of the burden and 
responsibility must henceforth rest upon younger 
shoulders. 

And now my story is ended, many incidents have 
been forgotten, others too sacred for the public eye 
necessarily omitted ; but if what has been written of 
the joys and sorrows, encouragements and disappoint- 
ments, of a missionary's life, will serve to cheer some 
lonely heart and strengthen some feeble knees that 
are apt to be weary through the difficulties of the 
way, by reminding them afresh of the Lord's own 
promise, " In due season ye shall reap if ye faint not," 
my effort will not have been in vain. 



"Cbe Oresbam pre0a, 

UNWIN BBOTHEBS, 
WOKING AND LONDON. 



f 






RETURN TO the circulation desk of any 
University of California Library 
or to the 

NORTHERN REGIONAL LJRARY FACILITY 
Bldg. 400, Richmond Field Station 
University of C - 



Richmond, CA 9 



DAYS 



ALL BOOKS MAY BL 

2-month loans may be renb, ,ig 

(415) 642-6753 
1-year loans may be recharged by bringing books 

to NRLF 
Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days 

prior to due date 



DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 



OCT 2 1991 



NOV 2 1999 



SEP 1 6 2005 



YC 41814 






D-SMT 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRAR/ 



