
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 




iIWm 




y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 












y Google 



y Google 



r ^w f ^<^.^ ^ ^ 






J 



i^r. i :a . ' ; .:. 



li,\' it*za v\;: : . » .•' 



t 



vi 






: a. X , 



y Google 



« ^ 






• f.- ■ • . '^7' : .- 



y Google 






THE 

YOUNG LADT 



or 



priE^SURE. 



F^klse Pleasore from abroad her jojb imports ; 
Bich from vithin, and self-finstained, the true. 

ToxmOb 



PUBLISHED BY THE 
AMEBIOAN TEAOT SOCIETY, 

150 NASSAU-STREET, NEW YORK. 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



THE NEW YORK 

POBUC LIBRARY 

ASTOn, LEHOX AND 

TILDEN FOUNDATIONS. 

R t9l0 L 



Entebed ocoordmg to Act of Congress, in the year 1865, by 
the American Tbact Society, in the Clerk's Office of the District 
Court of the Sonthem District of the State of New York. 



y Google 



CONTENTS. 



LETTEB L 

Home-life — ^Pleasures and trials . • 7 

LETTEB n. 
Teacher^s sympathy, • • . 14 

LETTEB m. 

Maiia's views and inquiries, .......... 24 

LETTEB IV. 

Dandng as an amusement, 29 

LETTEB V. 

Mrs. Fry— Miss Newton's thoughts, 44 

LETTEB YI, 

Becreation — A dancing-party — ^Adam Clarke, . . • • 49 

LETTEB Vn. 
Plans for recreation, 61 

LETTEB Vm. 

A mother's influence— Pleasure and improvement— Par- 
adise of the Paciflo— Politeness, 68 

LETTEB IX. 

Beading drde^Harriet Newell— Fashionable ladies, . 82 



y Google 



I 

4 CONTENT'S. 

LETTEE X. 

Dancing in Greece— in Italy— in France, 88 

LETTEE XI. 

Beading of lustoiy—Spartan women—Our pilgrimiathers, 102 

LETTEE Xn. 

Our country in the nineteenth century— Privilege of 
woman, 107 

LETTEE Xin. 

A visit— Influence of woman— Lessons from history, . 117 

LETTEE XTV. 

Niagara Falls— An old book— Plea for dandng, . . . 123 

LETTEE XV. 

A visitor— Thoughts on music, 133 

LETTEE XYE. 

The opera— The theatre, 137 

LETTEE xyn. 

Maria's thoughts, 150 

LETTEE XVni. 

Hannah More — The drama — Tableaux and charades — 
Sources of pleasure— Winter evening, 163 

LETTEE XIX. 
Moral courage and decision— Biography, ..... 163 

LETTEE XX. 

Christian communion— Shflikspeare, 166 



Digitized by 



Google 



OONTENTS. 6 

LETTEB XXL 
Mr. Emenon and his pupils— Beading cixcle» • • • • 170 

LETTEE XXIL 

Female edacation saperficial— Sensation liieratoie— Hie 
xomanoe and the novel— Moial tales, • • ; • . 175 

LETTER XXTTT. 
Noyel-reading discnssed, 189 

LETTEE XXIV. 
Sabbath-school books— The Bible, 198 

LETTEE XXV. 
What the reading circle think— Proposal, 200 

LETTEE XXVL 

Christian consistency— Influence of books — ^MQton and 
Byron— Poetry of the Bible, 204 

LETTEE XXVn. 
Plrayer-meetihg— Letter in the reading drde, .... 218 

LETTEE XXVnL 

Power of receiving pleasure — Natural scenery — ^The fine 
arts— Beading i)oetry — An interesting thought, . • 221 

LETTEE XXIX. 

Thoughts suggested— Young's Night Thoughts— Conver- 
sation, 228 

LETTEE XXX. 

Drawing— ^Painting— Music — Gardening— ^The home of 
a widow— Taste the handmai4 of religion. 



• • 



y Google 



6 CONTENTS. 

LETTEE XXXI. 

Onltiyation of flowers — * * Daag^iters of England "—Pleas- 
uiQB of a culiiiTated mind, 252 

LETTEE XXXn. 

Writing poetry-^GeniTis— Jenny lind— Qreatwork to be 
performed, • 259 

LETTEE XXXTTT. 

Gonversation in the Cirde— Benevolent pnipose— Miss 
Sill*s essay— Besolution to have a paper, .... 268 

LETTEE XXXTV. 

Literacy pnrsoits and domestic duties — Games of 
cbanoe— -Mr. Green— Games of skill, 274 

LETTEE XXXV. 
Influence of example— Items, 283 

LETTEE XXXYI. 

Amusements and character-— Influence of woman — Gla- 
diatorial combats — The Colosseum — Scene in a 
ohuzch—Telfimachus— The last combat, . • • . • 287 

LETTEE XXXYn. 

Besponsibility of woman— Allen and his daughter— ^Per- 
petua — Lady Hun.tingdon — First number of The 
Wreath, 299 

LETTEE XXXYin. 

Enjoyment — ^Test of an action — Self-made men and wom- 
en—Fashionable ladie»— Influence — Cowpeif- Dick, 305 



y Google 



THE 

YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER I. 



MY DEAB MIBS STAMLET: 

Once more an inmate of my own home, 
and happy in the society of beloved parents, 
brothers, and sisters, it is an additional pleas- 
ure that I may still have intercourse with the 
dear teacher who for these many years has 
watched over me witli a mother's love. The 
intimation given at our parting that yon would 
correspond with- your absent pupil, was, I as- 
sure you, a favor which I much desired ; yet 
knowing so well your many duties, it was alto- 
gether unexpected. Very few, I am sure, 
could hope to participate in this privilege, and 
I feel unworthy of being thus distinguished. 

I know that you love to follow your chil- 
dren to their far-off homes, and in imagination 
to share in the gladness of the first meeting, 



y Google 



8 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

and the sweet interchange of aflfection with the 
dear friends from whom they have been long 
separated. It caused a' great movement,^! 
assure you, in this quiet domain when your) 
Maria was restored to the embrace of these^ 
loved ones. Every one seemed to have been 
on the tiptoe of expectation, and from grand- 
ma down to little Jessie, to have something for 
sister that would make her feel how welcome 
was her return. Such a cordial greeting quite 
repays one for the pain of absence ; and then 
it is delightful to be again associated with those . 
who are so near and dear. 

But how true that there is no good Without 
a balancing evil. With all these pleasures I 
cannot ward off the sad feeling that presses 
upon me when I think of my dear school-home 
and of those friends there from whom I miust 
now be separated. ** Alma Mater" is a happy 
appellation for this endeared spot, and often I 
flpd myself there, absorbed in the '* memory of 
joys that are past, pleasant and mournful to 
the soul." 

I am constantly reminded of the difference 
between home-life and school-life. That old 
friend the bell, often so dreaded by the stu- 
dent, is the one first missed. The morning 



y Google 



YOUKO LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 9 

after my arrival, it really seemed difficult to 
leave my bed until admonished by its well- 
known noisy tones that it was the hour for 
rising. A school-girl, you know, is expected 
to have acquired a habit of punctuality ; and 
yet I find myself constantly in danger of los- 
ing my reputation for this important trait of 
character, in waiting for the signal to be given 
by this trusty messenger. To be obliged to 
plan business for each day seems really a great 
change, this having been so long done for me, 
and my duty being a fisiithfnl attention to the 
employment marked out for the hour. It is 
quite as true that there is no place like school, 
as that there is '' no place like home." Each 
has its peculiar trials as well as pleasures. 

In leaving the dear seat of instruction, I 
find myself entering upon new and untried 
scenes ; new duties as well as new enjoyments 
open before me. Instead of following a set of 
prescribed rules, I must decide for myself what 
course is the right one to be pursued ; and as 
I have been so long accustomed to have teach- 
ers to guide me, the responsibility seems not 
easy to be borne. Now how invaluable do 
those lessons appear that from week to week 
you used to impress upon your pupils in the 

1* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



10 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

"Practical Knowledge Class." Often do I 
revolve your instructions, and seek to recall 
something that will apply to my present cir- 
cumstances ; and then how plainly I seem to 
hear you say, '*GrO to Jesus; search the Scrip- 
tures ; seek the wisdom that cometh from 
above." In following these precepts, some- 
times light beams upon my pathway, and I 
feel strong to press onward in the performance 
of .duty; but then again I walk in darkness, 
and know not what course to pursue. 

Feeling assured that my dear teacher will 
sympathize in the trials of her absent child, 
and will feel it a privilege to aid her by words 
of counsel and encouragement, I have taken 
my pen with the intention of making her ac- 
quainted with my present circumstances. 

You know that I am T3ut a' babe in Christ, 
and quite inexperienced in the devices by 
which one is liable to be drawn aside from the 
narrow way; yet I am here surrounded by 
worldly influences, with no Christian friend 
with whom I can hold communion. My par- 
ents are not professors of religion, and my 
brothers and sisters, as well as my former 
associates, are devoted to gayety and pleas- 
ure» You know also that I am very impulsive, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 11 

much given to sportiveness and mirth, and 
can therefore perceive that the temptations to 
which I am exposed are those by which I am 
most liable to be led astray. 

There has been mnch change in the soci- 
ety here while I have been absent at school. 
Large and fashionable parties are now fre- 
quent, in which extravagance in dress and late 
hours are distinguishing features, while danc- 
ing seems to be-the favorite amusement. You 
will therefore be surprised when I tell you that 
these parties are attended by professors of re- 
ligion as well as others. Some of the leading 
members of the church open their houses for 
these entertainments, saying that there can be 
no possible harm in dancing, and that those 
who are opposed to it are exceedingly narrow- 
minded. 

I have been present at a few of these gay 
assemblies, not knowing at first just what 
course to pursue ; but the influence upon my 
own mind soon convinced me that it was my 
duty to decline an attendance ; and in taking 
this stand, I could not do otherwise than giv^ 
my reasons for it. This has caused many un- 
pleasant remarks, and my friends are quite 
disposed to ridicule what they call my Puri- 



y Google 



12 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

tanism. My minister too thinks me unneces- 
sarily precise, and that I take more upon my- 
pelf than is proper for so young a person. 

You thus perceive, my dear teacher, that 
I have some real trials, and that I need the 
advice and aid of a judicious friend. I come 
therefore to you with confidence, assured that 
you will give attention to what seems to your 
inexperienced pupil a case of so much impor- 
tance, and that you will be to her a counsellor 
and friend. 

One diflBculty that I have met with I must 
mention. As I knew you would direct, I have 
searched my Bible, thinking I should thus be 
able to prove dancing wrong ; but I can find 
no specific directions in regard to this amuse- 
ment. It seems also very evident that in an- 
cient times it was practised by persons of great 
piety ; as for instance, Miriam led the daugh- 
ters of Israel in dances, after the passage of 
the Eed sea; and David also, the "man after 
God's own heart," ** danced before the Lord 
,with all his might" when the ark of Crod was 
being brought to Jerusalem. Then there is 
the passage, ''a time to dance," that I do not 
know how to explain, if this amusement should 
never be practised. At the same time I can- 



y Google 



YOUKG LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 18 

not see how an attendance npon these fashion- 
able assemblies can be right, for I am sare the 
mind is thus unfitted for religious duties, as 
well as for the quiet and simple pleasures of 
home. 

Do, my dear Miss Stanley, write me soon, 
and explain this difficult subject. You will 
thus confer a great blessing on your affec- 
tionate 

MABIA. 



y Google 



14 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBB. 



LETTER II. 

I AM happy that my dear Maria reposes so 
much confidence in her absent teacher as to 
apply to her for a solution of the difficulties in 
which she finds herself involved. I do follow 
my beloved pupils to their far-oflf homes, and 
feel it a privilege to aid them in pressing on- 
ward in the heavenly way. To be informed 
of their peculiar trials and temptations is there- 
fore very desirable, as it enables me the better 
to adapt any suggestions I may make. 

In reading your letter, I could not but be 
impressed with the thought that our very trials 
are an evidence of our heavenly Father's love, 
so beautifully expressed by Cowper: 

'' Trials make the promise sweet, 
Trials give new life to prayer ; 
Bring me to my Savionr's feet, 
Lay me low, and keep me there." 

Thus a situation apparently unfavorable to 
growth in grace, by rendering us more watch- 
ful, more sensible of our own weakness, and 
leading us to rely more entirely on Jesus, 
proves a blessing to our souls. You recollect 
the argument of Butler, showing that in this 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 16 

probationary state we are encompassed with 
temptations, that by our resistance to them 
we may adhere more firmly to the right, and 
thus our character be improved. 

In a sermon which I recently heard, trials 
and temptations were considered means of 
grace, as well as prayer and the reading and 
hearing of the word. David seems to have had 
a sense of this when he says, "Before I was af- 
flicted, I went astray ; but now have I kept thy 
word." As the sweeping and continuous blast 
causes the tree to take deeper root, thus pre- 
paring it to stand firm before the hurricane, so 
temptation, by the eflPort required for its re- 
sistance, leads to the increase of moral power, 
and to a firmer hold on Him who is our strength 
and our salvation. 

That all the powers of body and mind are 
strengthened by use, is a law of our nature. 
Christian principle will not become strong, any 
more than the intellect, unless brought into 
vigorous exercise. In this resistance to influ- 
ences that would draw the believer astray into 
forbidden paths, the mainspring of every effort 
is love to Him wha has wrought the wondrous 
change in the soul. Love to God has been 
beautifiilly compared to the Kohinoor; other 



y Google 



16 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

virtues, to gems from this ** mountain of light" 
We know indeed that unless the heart is wholly 
consecrated to God, and the affections all ^cen- 
tre in this heavenly Friend, external compli- 
ance with the divine precepts is but a Phari- 
saical varnish. I trust your heart, my dear 
Maria, has been renewed by the Spirit of God, 
that you have entered '*by the gate" into the 
'* narrow way," and that you are pressing out- 
ward and upward. May the trials you now 
experience bring into vigorous exercise all the 
Christian graces, increasing your faith and 
your humble reliance on our great High-priest;, 
who can be ** touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities," having been ** tempted in all points 
like as we are, yet without sin." 

God says to you as to Solomon, ** Ask what 
I shall give thee." Like him, may you ask 
wisdom to pursue such a course as shall be for 
the glory of His great name ; and may you 
**ask in faith, nothing wavering;" for to such 
our Father in heaven * * giveth liberally." Your 
teacher would also implore wisdom and divine 
guidance* in replying to your inquiries, and di- 
recting you aright. 

The word of God is our only safe guide ; 
but we need the influences of the Holy Spirit 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 17 

to unfold its teachings, and to lead ns into all 
truth. We shall receive these divine influ- 
ences, if we come as little children and sit at 
Jesus' feet to be taught by him. It is true 
that we do not always find precepts as explicit 
as we may wish ; but prayerful study and dil- 
igent attention to the spirit of the sacred vol- 
ume causes light to beam from the inspired 
page, and the path of duty is made plain. It 
is essential to compare scripture with scrip- 
ture, as one part explains another, and thus 
enables us the better to understand the teach- 
ings contained in this divine directory. De- 
tached passages or precepts, taken without 
regard to their due connection, may be used 
to sustain almost any form of error ; and we 
may thus account for the various opinions, 
both in regard to doctrine and duty, profess- 
edly supported by the Bible. There is no 
excuse for being thus misled, since those who 
come humbly to be taught of God will be en- 
lightened from above; while those who seek 
to bring the divine word to their own stand- 
ard, are often left to follow their own devices. 
In regard to an attendance upon the par- 
ties which you mention, I am sure you have 
come to a right decision, although it places 



y Google 



18 TOTTNa LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

you in a trying position. This difference of 
opinion among pious people as respects danc- 
ing and other amusements of a like character, 
seems quite inexplicable. * I have given the 
subject considerable thought, and can see some 
reasons for the diversity now so common, which 
I will endeavor to explain. 

In the world of matter, objects look differ- 
ently according to the stand-point from which 
they are viewed; and the same seems to be 
true in the world of mind. . Thus one person 
looking at a gay assemblage for fashionable 
amusements merely as affording an opportu- 
nity for social enjoyment — ^and this in connec- 
tion with the law of our being, that we ar^ 
formed for social pleasures — would at once 
decide that the indulgence must be innocent ; * 
while another, taking into view the tendency 
of such scenes to produce vanity and love of 
dress, and to interfere with domestic and relig- 
ious duties, would as readily decide that such 
indulgences are wrong, inconsistent with the 
directions of his Lord and Master, and the ex- 
ample he left for our imitation. So in regard 
to dancing, one person, taking into considera- 
tion merely the movement of the limbs as exr 
pressive of joyful emotions, would decide it no 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEABUBB. 19 

more sinful thau walking or laughing; while 
another, considering the character of the ha- 
man heart, and the influence naturally result- 
ing from this fascinating amusement in mixed 
circles, would as readily decide it must be 
wrong. 

I will now reply to your inquiries respect- 
ing the dancing mentioned in Scripture. 

The word dance is often used by figure of 
speech as expressiye of joyful emotions: as, 
"We have piped unto you, and ye have not 
danced ; we have mourned, and ye have not 
lamented/' Here, as you perceive, danced is 
the opposite of lamented. So in the passage 
which you mention, '^a time to dance," it is the 
opposite of mourn, and therefore means rejoice. 
The sacred writer, however, is merely stating 
the condition of things in our world, and by 
many pithy antitheses, enumerating the various 
changes men are called to experience. He 
states what is true in the history of human 
• events, though evidently not with the design 
of showing what is lawful to be done. He also 
says, **a time to kill ;" but no one would there- 
fore argue that it is right to commit murder. 
Still dancing, like laughing or weeping, is a 
natorisJ expression of feeling. Children when 



y Google 



20 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

pleased^ skip or dance, as well as laugh ; and 
when in distress, burst into paroxysms of sob- 
bing or weeping. 

. The usages of civilized society lead us to 
Iqpk for a restraint upon the feelings among 
people of mature age. The discipline of edu- 
cation enables young persons to exercise self- 
control, and they thus acquire the habit of sup- 
pressing, on proper occasions, the external 
signs of joy or sorrow. Were we to be present 
at an Irish wake, we should undoubtedly wit- 
ness specimens of bodily exercises expressive 
of grief or gladness, in persons of advanced age ; 
but while amused at what seems really ludi- 
crous, we should consider the exhibition an evi- 
dence of an uncultivated state of society, and 
as indicating a want of maturity of mind. 

In the earlier ages of the world, '*when 
men labored to communicate their feelings to 
one another by those expressive cries and ges- 
tures which nature taught them," joyful emo- 
tions were indicated by measured movements 
of the body, as well as by language ; and thus, 
in many nations, dancing was employed in re- 
ligious worship. Combined with music both 
instrumental and vocal, this poetry of motion 
was used to give expression to feelings of glad- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 21 

ness and thanksgiving. Thus we are enabled 
to accoont for the dancing of David, and of 
others eminent for piety mentioned in the Bible. 
It is evident that it was performed as an act 
of religions worship, and as expressive of deep- 
felt emotions of gratitude and love. If dancing 
assemblies were now of a similar character, 
they might of conrse be regarded with appro- 
bation. To meet tc^ether to express thanks- 
giving to the Giver of all good, and to magnify 
His great and holy name, how worthy the em- 
ployment, and with what earnestness would the 
most devout engage in the delightful exercise. 
In this view of the subject, we are led to 
an important truth : that the moral character 
of an action is determined by the motive that 
leads to its performance. Music and dancing 
were employed in the worship of the golden 
calf, as well as when "Miriam took a timbrel 
in her hand, and all the women went out after 
her with timbrels and with dances ;" but how 
diflferent the performance on these two occa- 
sions : the one expressive of an unholy devotion 
to an idol, the other of adoration and praise to 
the eternal God, who had delivered them from 
the bondage of Egypt, and the yawning abyss 
of the Red sea. 



y Google 



22 YOUNG LADT OP PLEASUBE* 

The question might here be suggested j To 
which are dancing assemblies at the present 
day most nearly allied : the multitude that sur- 
rounded the golden calf, or the joyful company 
that followed the footsteps of Miriam? You 
may not be struck with much similarity in 
either case, but if any is to be found, it must 
be to the worshippers of the golden calf, who, 
like modem pleasure-seekers, "^at down to eat 
and to drink, and rose up to play," rather than 
to the grateful throng of Hebrew maidens who 
thus gave expression to their feelings of devout 
thanksgiving: '*Sing ye to the Lord, for He 
hath triumphed gloriously ;" a song not often 
heard in a fashionable coterie. 

And now, dear Maria, I think you can see 
very plainly that the dancing mentioned in 
Scripture as performed by the people of God, 
gives no countenance to this fascinating amuse- 
ment as introduced into parties at the present 
day. 

As a religious ceremony, dancing in modern 
.times is not practised in Christian nations, ex- 
cept by the Shakers, or followers of Ann Lee, 
a small denomination originating in England, 
though a few may be found in the United States. 
Li pagan countries, both of Africa and Asia, 



y Google 



YOUNQ LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 28 

as well as among the Indians of Norih Amer- 
ica, dancing is still performed as an act of 
idolatrous worship. 

I believe I have said enough to settle yonr 
difficulties as respects the passages of Scripture 
you mentioned, and it is time to bring my long 
letter to a close. 

In regard to the feelings of your parents and 
other friends, I would adyise you to explain 
your reasons for not wishing to mingle in scenes 
of gayety and dissipation. You will undoubt- 
edly be permitted to comply with the dictates 
of your own conscience. It can hardly be pos- 
sible that any one would insist upon your en- 
gaging in what you believe in your case would 
be wrong. It is necessary to act with decision. 
Christians never honor Qtod, nor induce unbe- 
lievers the more to respect religion, by con- 
formity to the world, nor by indulging in such 
amusements as indicate a greater love of pleas- 
ure than of God. Consistency is admired even 
by those who are themselves inconsistent 

With the earnest desire and prayer that 
yon may clearly see your duty, and resist 
every allnrement to a wrong course, I am your 
affectionate friend, M. STAimEH. 



y Google 



24 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER IIL 

MY DEAR MISS STANLEY: 

Many thanks for your letter, and for the 
light you have thrown upon my pathway, I 
feel very grateful for your efforts to give me 
right views of a subject wiiich it seemed to me 
BO difficult to understand, though I must ac- 
knowledge that after reading your explanation, 
the whole matter seemed so plain, that I could 
not help feeling out of patience with myself 
for looking at the subject so superficially. I 
think your letter will lead me to read my Bible 
with more thought and attention, and to feel 
the importance of coming as a little child, to be 
taught of God. 

I am more and more sensible every day 
that one of my greatest faults is acting withouj 
reflection, or from the impulse of feeling. In 
this way I am very apt to come to wrong con- 
clusions, as well as to do things which after- 
wards giTe me much regret 
^ I heard a sermon last evening from the 
,text, **Be not weary in well-doing." In de- 
scribing patience, the minister said, that it does 



y Google 



TOUNO LADY OP PLEASUBE. 26 

not mean ** passive inactivity," but "earnest 
labor, nntil the object to be attained is accom- 
plished." The laying of the Atlantic cable was 
given- as an illustration of the exercise of this 
virtue. May I never be weary in my efforts 
to know my duty and do it; and may I ever 
be guided by principle rather than by feel- 
ing. 

What you said about the design of God in 
placing us in this state of trial, was not alto- 
gether new to me, for I remember well what 
Butler says; but that trials and temptations 
are means of grace, I never considered in just 
that light. Still, when reading the passage, 
''My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall 
into divers temptations, knowing this, that the 
trying of your faith worketh patience," I thought 
it meant about tlie same thing. 

The danger of coming to a wrong conclu- 
ion by looking only at one side of a thing, 
is finely illustrated by the story of the two 
knights and the shield, the one declaring it was 
gold, and the other silver; both being right, 
because one side was gold and the other silver ; 
and yet they almost came to blows, and would 
have done so, if each had not happened to get 
a glance at the other side. 

Yoaus LadyoTPleMiire. n 



y Google 



26 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 

The story of the chameleon too, is a good 
illustration of the different ideas people get, ac- 
cording to the light in which any thing is view- 
ed. I can now understand how persons can 
differ about dancing, as well as other subjects. 
I can also see plainly that the character of an 
action depends upon the motive for its perform- 
ance. I recollect very well what Dr. Wayland 
says in regard to this. 

In answer to your question, to which of the 
assemblies you mentioned, a modern dancing 
party bears the greatest resemblance, I could 
not help thinking, that those who are devoted 
to fashionable entertainments are in some re- 
spects like the worshippers of the golden calf; 
for they seem to make an idol of some partic- 
ular amusement, and to give themselves up to 
it, as much as the Israelites did to their molten 
god. Those who spend whole nights in danc- 
ing, and who seem to think they could not en- 
dure life if deprived of this source of enjoyment, 
do really make it their golden calf. We have 
a young lady here that I think is an illustra- 
tion of this. She was told not long since by 
her physician, that she could not live long, if 
she continued to attend parties ; but she says 
she is ''so fond of dancing, that she cannot give 



y Google 



YOUKQ LADT OF PLEASUBS. 27 

it up ;" and I know that she seldom stays away 
from any scene of pleasure. 

But you say that dancing, or this poetry of 
motion, is a natural expression of joyful feel- 
ings J is it then improper, when a light-heart- 
ed company of young ladies are together, to 
take a little dance? If it is natural to be in 
motion when one feels mirthful and happy, I 
should think it would be just as proper to 
dance a cotillion, or skip over -the floor in 
waltzes and polkas, as to laugh and talk non- 
sense. Children skip about when they are fall 
of fun and gladness, and why may not those a 
little older skip by rule, or to the sound of 
music, when they feel light-hearted and joy- 
ous? I cannot see what harm there would be 
in doing this. I should think this kind of rec- 
reation better than talking nonsense. If it is 
wrong, it seems strange that so many good 
people approve of it ; and not only permit it to 
be practised in their own houses, but encour- 
age their children to learn to perform its varied 
evolutions with ease and grace. I do not ask 
if it is right to attend parties which do not break 
up until near morning; but whether, when a 
few young ladies are together, they might not 
keep step with the music of the piano in a lit- 



y Google 



28 TOUNG LADY OP PXEASUBE. 

tie dance. I do not see what diflference there 
can be between snch dancing and calisthenics, 
or other gymnastic exercises; and these, you 
know, are very much approved and practised 
in schools. 

My parents are not disposed to insist upon 
my doing what I think is wrong; but it would 
gratify them to have me take a part in this 
amusement in small circles, ^nd sometimes to 
attend a party. They say they^ do not like I 
should be so singular, and set myself up as 
being better than other people. 

Please write me what you think of such lit- 
tle dances, and tell me how far I ought to con- 
form to the customs of those with whom I as- 
sociate. Yours with much esteem, 

MARIA. 



yGoOgfe 



YOUNG LADT OP PLEASUBE. 29 



LETTER IV. 

MY DEAB MABIA: 

Yours is received, and its pemsal has been 
to me a source of much satisfaction. I rejoice 
in the evidence it gives that you are be- 
coming acquainted with your own character, 
and engaged in the work of self-improvement 
Happy am I to be assured that my impulsive 
Maria really feels the importance of acquiring 
the habit of close thinking, and of carefully ex- 
amining that blessed chart which marks out 
the way to the heavenly Canaan. 

I am anxious that my beloved pupil should 
become a discreet and useful woman; and I 
know that, to attain this great end, she must 
exercise her reasoning powers, and ever act 
under the influence of Christian principle. With 
the best intentions, yet being very much a 
creature of impulse, and possessing great live- 
liness of imagination, there is danger of coming 
to wrong conclusions, and pursuing a course 
which may give cause for repentance. To im- 
prove our own character, as well as to benefit 
others, is our life-work. This can be accom- 



y Google 



80 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

plished only by becoming thoroughly acquaint- 
ed with ourselves, as well as exploring the va- 
rious avenues of knowledge that open before 
us. Especially must we study the Scriptures, 
and earnestly seek the enlightening influences 
of the Holy Spirit. This is a work which we 
are all under obligation to perform, and in its 
perfoi*mance we have the promise of receiving 
aid from above. We are accountable for the 
talents which we have the ability to gain, as 
well as for those committed to our trust. This 
is plainly taught in the parable of the talents, 
by the doom pronounced on the wicked and 
slothful servant. 

You inquire whether dancing, since it is a 
natural method of expressing pleasurable feel- 
ings, may not be practised for this purpose in 
an evening party of young ladies ; or rather, if 
this is not as well as to spend the time in talk- 
ing nonsense. To skip around the room keep- 
ing time with music, is certainly a very inno- 
cent way of taking recreation; and that it 
should ever bei condemned by good people, 
must appear very strange to those who have 
had little experience of the seductive influences 
to. which they are exposed in this world of sin, 
and who are little aware of the many devices 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 81 

of the enemy of souls, By which they are liable 
to be ensnared. In itself it may be more in- 
nocent than vain and foolish conversation, and 
no^more objectionable, than calisthenics and 
other gymnastic exercises. 

Before answering your inquiry, however, 
permit me to say a few words in regard to 
amusements in general. The word amusement 
is said to be derived from '*a musis" The 
muses, as you know, were considered by the 
Grreeks, the divinities presiding not only over 
the fine arts, but also over geometry, astrono- 
my, and other sciences; consequently ''a mw- 
m" implies, turning, away from severe labor, 
and recreating one's self The word recreation 
means recreating, or producing new strength 
and buoyancy of feeling, which can only be at- 
tained by relaxation. Here, again, relaxation 
is a figure of speech, by which it is shown that 
aa the bow needs to be unbent in order to re- 
tain its elasticity, so the mind requires to be 
relieved from close application that it may re- 
tain its vigor, and its ability t(5 think with 
clearness and force. Amusements then are 
necessary to recruit our wearied natures; and 
as w^ are social beings, those are sometimes 
desirable that can be enjoyed in concert, or 



y Google 



82 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

which tend to the development of the social 
feelings. 

We must not lose sight, however, of the 
great truth that we are also accountable beings, 
and that we cannot consistently allow ourselves 
to become absorbed in any thing, either busi- 
ness or pleasure, by which we shall impair our 
ability for the performance of duty, or for ful- 
filling the obligations incumbent upon us. The 
increase of the talents committed to our charge 
being required, to accomplish this should be 
our first object, and we should indulge only in 
such amusements, and to such a degree, as will 
promote this advancement. Social intercourse. 
Or a mutual interchange of thought and feeling 
with those whom we love, is a .very happy 
method of obtaining this exhilarating influence ; 
but whether frivolous chitchat, or talking non- 
sense, is a necessary means for accomplishing 
this purpose, or an indulgence at all consistent 
with the character of a rational being, is a 
question which requires serious consideration. 
Conversation may certainly b# a pleasant rec- 
reation, and yet not consist of mere idle gos- 
sip, or in repeating that which fills the mind 
with thoughts insipid and vain. We are, how- 
ever, obliged to know that the intercourse in 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OF PLEA8UBE. 88 

fashionable circles is too often of this trifling 
cliaracter; and it is with shame too that I ad- 
mit that oar sex take the lead in conversation 
of this kind, though it cannot be said that they 
alone carry it on. Many, no doabt, think to 
improve upon this state of things, by the intro- 
duction of dancing. However, as two wrongs 
cannot make a right/ the evil of the one by no 
means establishes the innocence of the other. 

Dancing consists of various movements of 
the body, some of them proper and beautiful, 
others, when practised by both sexes, repul- 
sive to a person of true delicacy. Waltzing 
is the most objectionable, though the polka 
also seems calculated to corrupt the character. 
Those who have never seen these dances, can 
have little idea of their impropriety. I not 
long since met with this remark: **I do not 
think the waltz a modest dance, and the coarse 
familiarity of the polka is only fit for low so- 
ciety." Thus you see there are serious objec^ 
tions to some kinds of dancing. These exer- 
cises may be ofiaitted, but not easily, in a com- 
pany of any size ; and the varied evolutions ol 
the mazy dance, under the influence of music, 
are so fascinating, that one would hardly have 
power to resist the allurement, should they be 

2* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



84 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

introduced, although revolting to the feelings 
in hours of sober reflection. This brings into 
view one of the great evils of this amusement, 
its absorbing tendency. 
' There is much theorizing about the inno- 
cence of a little dance ; but in practice, moder- 
ate dancing is something very unusual. When 
do such parties usually close ? Is not the ap- 
proach of morning the signal for the gay revel- 
lers to return to their homes ? The exciting 
character of this amusement, and the excess 
to which it is carried, furnish a conclusive rea- 
son for declining its indulgence.* In the little 
young ladies' dance of which you speak in your 
letter, you are particular to mention. that you 
would close at an early hour. This no doubt 
would be the intention of each of you, but un- 
der its fascinating influence, hours are very 
liable to pass uncounted. 

In deciding upon the propriety of an amuse- 
ment, we must look at it as usually practised ; 
and we must not only take into consideration 
its effect upon ourselves, but upon society. Dr. 
Paley gives a rule which we should think all 
reasonable persons would follow: ** When there 
are two sides, the one safe and the other uncer- 
tain, it is always best to take the safe side," 



y Google 



YOUNQ LADY OF PLEASUBE. 86 

And another writer says, '' Entire abstinence 
from dancing is probably the safer rule ; for 
those who ventare a few steps will soon be 
drawn beyond the first intention, while their 
views of right and expediency will gradually 
sink to a standard with their wishes." 

A select circle of young ladies might, as 
you suggest, indulge for a little time in dancing 
with no injury to themselves, unless it should 
give them so great a taste for this pleasure 
that they would be induced to attend mixed 
assemblies, and to join the giddy throng that 
at the dawn of day are still absorbed in the 
whirling mazes of the dance ; and then no cal- 
culation could be made of the amount of evil 
resulting from this indulgence in the little cir- 
cle at the evening party. Even if all the com- 
pany are not thus affected — if only one, by the 
example here given, or by this fascinating influ- 
ence, is drawn within the eddying circles by 
which she will be ingulfed in the vortex of dis- 
sipation, would not the possibility of such a 
result be a sufficient reason to beware of this 
amusement? What if those instrumental in 
leading this companion to indulge in this intox- 
icating pleasure, and thus to enter upon the 
way of ruin, were the professed followers of 



y Google 



86 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE- 

Christ ; were they not guilty of a great sin ? 
In pursuing this course, were they imitating 
Him who gave himself for the redemption of^ 
,^ lost sinners ? Is it not the duty of every Chris- 
i tian to deny himself and follow Jesus? And 
if love to this divine Friend is the ruling prin- 
ciple in his heart, will he not, by self-denying 
obedience, give evidence of this love ? 

And here I would refer you to an instance, 
which I think shows the course which will be 
pursued by one who is moVed to action by this 
blessed influence. A circle of young ladies in 
Hartford were accustomed to meet for social 
enjoyment, spending a part of the time in mu- 
sic and dancing. The exercise was performed 
with so much propriety, and by a company so 
select, that it seemed in no respect objectiona- 
ble — similar probably to what you propose. 
Miss Mary Hawes, afterwards Mrs. Van Len- 
nop of the Syrian mission, was on« of this cir- 
cle ; and although the daughter of their minis- 
ter and a professor of religion, she united in 
the dancing as well as in the music. At length, 
however, she learned that a person attending 
a public assembly had given as a reason for 
this attendance, **Mary Hawes dances." Al- 
though sensible of the difference in the two 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 87 

performances, yet it was plain to her that she, 
by engaging in this exercise, was influencing 
others to frequentscenes of exciting amusement, 
and thus to become absorbed in the giddy whirl 
of fashionable pleasures. She therefore at once 
decided that she would dance no more. For 
a time she continued her attendance at the 
circle without taking part in this exercise, then 
left at the close of the musical performance, 
and at length withdrew entirely. In the bloom 
of youth, and with a keen relish for social pleas- 
ures, from love to Jesus and a desire to ad- 
vance his cause, she was led to deny herself 
an indulgence in what was to her a source of 
refined enjoyment. May my dear Maria have 
this same spirit of devotion to the blessed Re- 
deemer. 

A luxury of which some can partake with 
more safety than others, or that with a moder- 
ate use seems not particularly injurious, but 
when indulged to excess is found to be attended 
with great danger, must be used with caution, 
if used at all ; and the only real safety is in ab- 
staining from it altogether. The danger also is 
in proportion to the delight experienced in its 
indulgence, and the difficulty of discovering the 
point at which this indulgence should cease. 



y Google 



88 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

I think this will apply to the subject before ns ; 
and I know of nothing that so fully illustrates 
the stand that, under such circumstances, should 
be taken, as the course pursued in our country 
in the great temperance reformation. 

The drinking^ of ardent spirits was a very 
general practice in my youthful days, by many 
with no apparently injurious effects, and no one 
seemed to imagine the moderate use of it could 
possibly be wrong. Some knew when they 
had taken, as much as they could bear, and the 
little they drank seemed to be no injury to 
them. Still ijitemperance prevailed to a fear- 
ful extent, and miserable wretches reduced to 
a state of beastly intoxication were to be found 
in all classes of society, while persons making 
rapid advances to this state were everywhere 
common. An effort was first made to induce 
people to use spirits temperately ; and for this 
purpose societies were formed in some parts of 
the country. The influence of these societies 
was, however, scarcely felt. So riveted were 
the chains of habit, and so fascinating this bev- 
erage, that the maddening potion would be 
gradually increased, though infamy, disease, 
and death stared fearfully at the wretched ine- 
briate. He drank on until reason was gone, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 89 

and then dragged a miserable existence to a 
drunkard's grave. 

At length aroused to a sense of danger, 
both the Christian and the philanthropist felt 
that something must be done to arrest the evil, 
and the subject was taken into serious consid- 
eration. Total abstinence was thought to be 
absolutely necessary in order to a reformation ; 
not for the reformation of the confirmed sot, 
for at that time this was thought impossible, 
but for those who occasionally indulged in the 
free use of spirits. But to decide who were the 
persons in danger, and who therefore needed to 
abstain wholly from this dangerous beverage, 
was not easy ; for how could the precise point 
be ascertained at which intemperance begins? 
So gradual is the descent from an almost im- 
perceptible commencement, that in the use of 
ardent spirits it is hard to tell how far one may 
indulge with safety. Those most rapidly ad- 
vancing in the downward course were some- 
times least willing to admit their danger ; and 
it therefore became necessary for those most 
decidedly temperate to set the example of total 
abstinence. This was done. The best men in 
the nation came to the rescue, and took a no- 
ble stand. • For a time woman was not called 



y Google 



40 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

to enter the lists ; but it was- soon found neces- 
sary that her influence should be exerted in 
promoting this worthy cause. With readiness 
did she engage in the work, and unite in the 
pledge of total abstinence from all intoxicating 
drinks. The mighty results accomplished by 
this effort we will not trace, but will make the 
application to the subject we are now investi- 
gating. 

Dancing is so fascinating, and produces so 
great an excitement of feeling, that a person 
drawn into its mazes, like the victim of intem- 
perance, seems unable to extricate herself. Not 
only does its frequent indulgence create a dis^ 
taste for domestic pleasures ; it is attended by 
a love of dress, with a profusion of vain and 
frivolous thoughts ; the heart is hardened, and 
serious reflection entirely dissipated. How 
often have fashionable entertainments put an 
end to anxiety for the soul, and produced 
insensibility to eternal things. You recollect 
the account of that young lady induced by the 
present of a rich dress from her father to attend 
a ball, who thus lost her conviction of sin, and 
in her dying hour declared this dress the price 
of her soul, and her father the cause of her 
eternal ruin. A good minister says, **If I 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 41 

wished to lead as many as possible blindfold 
to destruction, I would preacli up dancing." 

Before this you have undoubtedly antici- 
pated my answer to your inquiry, and hare 
also inferred that those who desire to exert a 
right influence, should take the same stand as 
respects this amusement as was taken in regard 
to the drinking of ardent spirits. If from that 
which in itself is right the apostle was willing 
to abstain, lest he might grieve one of his fel- 
low-Christians, much more ought we to feel our 
obligation to abstain from that which is unfa^ 
vorable to virtue, often producing feelings at 
variance with the commands of God and dis- 
honoring his holy name. 

We have already spoken of the fiswt that 
this amusement is by many good people thought 
innocent, and by others as very evil. This 
diflference of opinion may be caused, I suppose, 
by some having indulged in it in the form least 
ol]0ectionable ; they therefore do not feel any 
injury to be apprehended; while others, ac- 
quainted with its real influence, feel constrained 
to pass upon it the sentence of condemnation. 
Some of my friends seem much surprised at the 
suggestion that dancing- excites wrong feelings, 
for they never were conscious of any thing of 



y Google 



43 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

the kind. How well such persons are acquaint- 
ed with their own hearts I do not know, nor can 
I tell what views they have of Christian obliga- 
tion. Much the same remarks are made by 
many in reference to the use of ardent spirits- 
A little, they say, does not hurt them, and they 
cannot be deprived of this luxury because oth- 
ers will injure themselves by using it to excess. 
I fear that those who thus seem to think 
only of themselves are unacquainted with Paul, 
and have little idea of what is meant by giving 
up all for Christ. Christians are assuredly 
bound to abstain from what may lead others 
into sin, and from any act that may grieve even 
the *' little ones" that believe in Christ. I 
think a serious and prayerful study of our Sav- 
iour's teachings in Matt. 18:6-10 will lead the 
child of Grod to realize the necessity of watch- 
fulness and prayer, lest by following the pre- 
cepts of worldly wisdom, he should be guilty 
of the sin there so vividly portrayed. The ex- 
ample of the great apostle furnishes a striking 
illustration of the manner in which he under- 
stood this divine teaching, and should impress 
Christians with the. obligation which rests upon 
them as well as upon Eaul, towards those who 
are members of that family whose names are 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 18 

written in heaven. An indulgence in this 
amusement is declared to be "oflFensive to a 
majority of the people of God ;" this therefore 
is a sufficient reason for those who profess the 
name of dhrist to abstain from it altogether. If 
not evil, it has at least **the appearance of evil." 

It cannot indeed be denied, that in our 
country many more persons professedly pious 
now engage in dancing than formerly, but the 
same can be said of Sabbath-breaking. It is 
indeed lamentably true that the customs, if not 
the principles, of our Puritan fathers are be- 
coming more and more unfashionable, and that 
the distance between the church and the world 
is greatly lessened. People of the world have 
not the dread of religion that has sometimes 
been manifested, perhaps owing to a change in 
public opinion, but rather, I think, to the fact 
that it is not looked upon as requiring so much 
self-denial. 

If you please, you may show this letter to 
your parents and to your Christian friends. 
They may thus be induced to excuse you for 
differing in opinion from them, and perhaps 
may be led to view the subject in a new light. 

Write soon to your afifectionate, 

M. STANLEY. 



y Google 



44 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBB. 



LETTER V- 

MY DEAB TEACHER : 

Your last letter has led me to look upon 
the subject we are discussing in a new light: 
that in deciding upon any course of action, we 
should consider not only its influence upon our- 
selves, but also upon others, and that we are un- 
der obligation to avoid whatever may grieve the 
children of Q-od, I have never before realized 
as I do now. That such, a little thing as unit- 
ing in a dance in a select circle of young ladies 
should be made the subject of serious consider- 
ation, and that the indulgence would be wrong 
if Christians were grieved or offended by it, 
were new ideas to me. Still, after carefully 
perusing your letter, and reflecting upon the 
teachings of our Saviour to which you referred 
me, I cannot but feel that you are right. 1 
had always supposed that if conscious of no 
evil influence to myself, there was no reason to 
decline taking a part in dancing, or any other 
amusement that might be proposed. I ought 
to have remembered what Dr. Wayland teaches 
in his Moral Science, that *' two views are to be 
taken of an action : first, as affecting ourselves ; 



y Google 



YOUNG liADT OF PLEASURE. 45 

and secondly, as affecting both onrselres and 
society." I now also see that the direction of 
the ap^tle, '' Abstain from all appearance of 
evil/' as well as the teachings of oar Saviour, 
require ns to avoid this amusement; for many 
Christians consider it evil, and are grieved 
when those who profess to be his followers 
give themselves up to its indulgence. 

I have lately been reading the Life of Mrs. 
Elizabeth Fry, and I found something which 
illustrates this very point upon which we are 
writing. In giving an account of a visit to 
London, she speaks of the opportunity she had 
to engage in the varied pleasures of. this gay 
metropolis ; but she also says that she was led 
wholly to give up attending all places of public 
amusement. The reason she gave for this was, 
"I saw they tended to promote evil; there- 
fore, even if I could attend them without being 
hurt myself, I felt that in entering these places 
I Iqnt my aid to promote that which, from what 
I saw, I was sure had led many from the path 
of rectitude and chastity, and brought them 
into much sin." This is that good Mrs. Fry 
who engaged with so much earnestness in the 
instruction of degraded women in Newgate. 
She exhibits in both cases the same self-deny- 



y Google 



46 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

ing spirit of devotion to the good of her fellow- 
beings. She would not gratify herself if, by 
her example, others might be led into the way 
of evil. She was also willing to withdraw from 
scenes of refinement and social enjoyment, to 
labor for the renovation of beings the most de- 
graded, and whose condition must have been 
revolting to a person t^f true delicacy. What , 
but love could have moved her to such a work ; 
love to Jesus, and to those for whom he shed 
his precious blood ? The evidence that I have 
the spirit of Christ must surely be a willingness 
to deny myself for his sake. 

I have showed your letter to my friends. 
I do not kn6w what any one thinks but my 
parents, and they say you are right. I now 
see that it would not be well to introduce 
dancing into our evening circles. Our Sav- 
iour has taught us to pray, **Lead us not into 
temptation ;" and if we oflfer this prayer in sin- 
cerity, we shall not voluntarily expose our- 
selves to allurements to do wrong. 

But my dear Miss Stanley, do not cease 
writing me upon this subject. I need your 
timely suggestions to remind me of my duty, 
and to aid me in exerting a right influence 
over those with whom I associate. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 47 

I have recently met with another book 
which I think a great treasure. It is the 
"Life of Adelaide Newton." I have found 
some excellent thoughts on the course to be 
pursued in regard to worldly amusements, so 
much to the point that I think you will be 
pleased if I copy some of them. In writing to 
a school-mate, she says, 

"I cannot help thinking, if you are nfuch 
occupied with thoughts of heaven, of holiness, 
of the meek and lowly Jesus, and how he lived 
and walked on earth, you will feel a secret 
shrinking from worldly society, which will 
make balls, etc., very painful to you. God 
has left no positive commands upon things of 
this sort, for he knows that when the heart is 
given to him, the life will assuredly be given 
too. And the motive of gospel obedience is 
not so much duty as love. The child that 
loves its parents devotedly, does what will 
please them at any cost." But again she says, 
"If you feel obliged to join your family or 
friendis in scenes which give you no pleasure, 
let them see it is from a sense of duty, not 
from inclination;" and again, that while the 
apostle says, ** *Come out and be separate, and 
touch not the unclean thing,' he tells us, on the 



y Google 



48 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASITBE. 

other hand, that if we keep no company with 
ungodly persons, we must needs go out of the 
world." She says too that '' each day Jesus 
is saying to the Father for you, I pray not 
that she should be taken out of the world, but 
that she should be kept from the evil ;" and that 
** -these words maybe a constant plea when we 
are in diflSculty how to act." 

\ think Miss Newton's suggestions alto- 
gether to the point. She gives evidence of 
such deep-toned piety, an4 such spirituality 
of mind, that though young in years, she seems 
to have made great advance in a Christian life. 
May it be thus with your 

MABIA. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 49 



LETTER VI. 

/ 

MTDEABMABIA: 

Your letter was very gratifying. I rejoice 
that you not only feel determined yourself to 
avoid what is wrong, but to use your influence 
to induce others to do the same. If we have 
evidence that love is the ruling principle that 
moves us to action, we may feel confident that 
we are bom of God. The spirit of Christ is a 
spirit of love. " God so loved the world, that 
he gave his only begotten Son," that the world 
''might not perish;" and love to men while 
" yet sinners," led the blessed Saviour to bear 
the sin of the world in his own body on the 
cross ; and if we have this love, we shall take 
up the cross and follow him. 

I am glad that you have the ''Life of Ade- 
laide Newton." I think I have seldom read a 
biography more calculated to do one good. 
She was an eminent Christian, though but a 
youth when called home to her gracious re- 
ward ; but she lived much in a little time. As 
Jier short life was spent in a retired sphere, 
free from great dangers and thrilling scenes, 

3 



y Google 



60 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

and much of it in a sick-room, an example is 
thus furnished which may be particularly ben- 
eficial to persons in the common walks of life, 
and to those who are called to suflfer as well as 
to act. She possessed great abilities and a 
highly cultivated mind; but piety was her 
shining ornament. As a Christian' she was 
superior to others. May my dear Maria have 
this living, growing piety. I rejoice that she 
has so good a helper as Miss Newton. May 
you be enabled to resist the temptations of this 
alluring world, of your own evil heart, and of 
the great enemy of souls. Beware of the de- 
lusive plea, **It is only for once." If a path 
lead astray, the first step in it must be wrong. 
We should also continually bear in mind, 
that we cannot keep in the right way except 
we follow our divine Leader. ** Looking to 
Jesus" — ^how much is implied in this, and how 
constantly should the eye of faith be fixed 
upon him. The hill DifiBculty is before us ; 
but though steep and rugged the ascent, and 
the lions seem ready to devour us, onward and 
upward we must press. We **walk by faith," 
and relying upon the Captain of our salvation, 
we shall come off *' conquerors, and more than 
conquerors," over all our spiritual enemies. 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 61 

"He endured the cross, despising the shame.'' 
What an incentive this ! With such a leader, 
can we fail to press onward? The apostle's 
direction is, ''Consider him wlK) endured such 
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye 
be wearied and faint in your minds," resisting 
"even to blood, striving against sin." In noth- 
ing will a believer be willing to engage, upon 
which he cannot implore the blessing of God. 
By this test can the character of an action be 
proved ; for upon that which puts God out of 
the thoughts, that leads to the indulgence of 
feelings which he has forbidden, which unfits 
for duties that he requires to be performed, 
can we seek his blessing ? We must strive to 
know our duty, must examine the ground of 
our obligations ; and becoming fully persuaded 
of the course we ought to pursue, must adhere 
to it with firmness. 

I am aware that in the stand you have 
taken, you will meet with opposition. The 
advocates for vain amusements will maintain 
their cause with much tenacity, and you must 
be able to show very clearly the reasons for 
your decision. Your opponents will not al- 
ways be the worldly-minded and vain; for 
many, who by profession belong to the ranks 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



62 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE, 

of the Redeemer, will argue with an earnest- 
ness worthy of a better cause, that an indul- . 
gence in these pleasures is both proper and 
consistent for those who have consecrated 
themselves to the service of Christ. This is 
indeed sad, and teaches us the necessity of 
searching diligently to find the right way. 

That people must have some 'amusement, 
is urged as earnestly as if any one doubted its 
truth. This is a device often used in support- 
ing any form of error — to attempt to prove 
some other thing rather than the very point 
presented for proof The necessity of relax- 
ation for both mind and body is self-evident; 
it is taught by the laws of nature as well as by 
the testimony of experience. It is also true, 
that recreations, to be beneficial, must be pleas- 
ing, and of such a character as to give to life 
an agreeable variety. They must recreate, 
or give new strength for the labor to be per- 
formed. Movements of the body are pleasing 
and necessary for health ; therefore dancing is 
suggested as one of the most suitable methods 
of attaining exhilaration of mind and vigor of 
body. It is undoubtedly true that in this 
''poetry of motion" there is a refreshing influ- 
ence, and that it might be so performed as to 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



TOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 63 

be highly beneficial. It is not however for 
dancing as an exercise, or as a preparation for 
the better discharge of daty, that the advocate 
for this pleasure would plead ; it is for an in- 
dulgence in this amusement for its own sake. 
The propriety of dancing-parties is urged, and 
it is asserted that fashionable assemblies fur- 
nish this agreeable and very desirable recrea- 
tion. Let the exercise be ever so long contin- 
ued, or the most unseasonable portion of the 
twenty-four hours be selected for the perform- 
ance, still it is urged that dancing is healthful 
and pleasant, and that attendance upon these 
scenes of pleasure cannot therefore be im- 
proper. Those who from frequent indulgence 
have become thus entangled in the wiles laid 
down to ensnare them by the arch deceiver, 
see not their folly nor their danger. Self-grat- 
ification being their great aim, they weary 
themselves in its pursui|. This is apparent in 
the excess to which this amusement is carried 
in fashionable circles. The devotees of pleas- 
ure see not that they are doing outrage to na- 
ture, nor that by kindling the fire of excite- 
ment, neither vigor of body nor a healthy ex- 
hilaration of mind can be produced. 

The graphic description of this method of 



y Google 



64 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

receiving pleasure, as given by Miss Beecher, 
would seem suflScient to convince any reason- 
able person of the inconsistency of resorting to 
places of fashionable amusement for the invig- 
oration of either mind or body. I will quote 
this description for your benefit, or to aid you 
in sustaining your cause. 

"In the first place, these assemblies are in 
the night season, when quiet is better than ex- 
ercise. Next, they are in rooms where the air 
is vitiated by many lights and many breaths, 
and where quiet is far better than quickened 
circulation. Next, the clothing of the female 
portion of the performers is usually the very 
worst that could be selected for such an occa- 
sion, too thin about the chest, and too heavy 
below it. /Phen, before the night is passed, 
the stomach, which should rest when the mus- 
cles are exercised, is loaded with the most un- 
healthy of all kinds of food, condiments, and* 
drinks. Finally, after the skin, stomach, and 
lungs have been debilitated by hours of abuse, 
and the whole brain and nervous system ex- 
hausted by mental and physical excitement, 
the company adjourn to cold halls and robing- 
rooms, and go forth to ride through the night 
air with weary, sleepy drivers, to weary. 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



TOUKG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 65 

sleepy servants or friends, whom selfish amuse- 
ments have deprived of proper rest and re- 
pose." 

By a night spent in this manner, what re- 
freshment can there be to mind or body, and 
for what duties can a person be thus prepared? 
It is true that recreations are necessary not 
only for the young, but for those who are im- 
mersed in business, oppressed with labor and 
care; but, 

''To join adyantage to anuui6ment» to gather profit with 
pleasure. 
Is the wise man's neoessaiy aim when he lieth in the shade 
of recreation." 

His motto is, *' Business before pleasure," and 
his aim to become so much refreshed and in- 
vigorated as to be better fitted for the per- 
formance of duty. Children and youth, not 
having gained wisdom by experience and 
reflection, need the advice of older friends; 
they need direction in regard to the choice of 
amusements, and the amount of time which may 
with propriety be devoted to them. Recrea- 
tions are of the right character only when they 
fit us for the better performance of that which 
we are under obligation to perform. They 
must tend to promote the health of both body 
and mind; and as we are immortal beings. 



y Google 



66 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUEE. 

must not render us indifferent to the realities 
of another world, nor prevent a preparation 
for an eternal state. The excitement and fas- 
cination of this exercise, and consequently its 
immoderate indulgence, are therefore serious 
objections to its use.- If it is urged that the 
amusement should not be carried to such an 
excess, we can only reply, that in calculating 
the effect of any pleasure, we must consider it 
as usually practised. 

Suppose we survey a company engaged in 
this amusement. Though there may be grace- 
fulness and beauty in some of the movements, 
are there not others from which a person of 
true delicacy would shrink ? Let us examine 
the countenances as they pass before us. Is 
there not here a simpering smile, there a scorn- 
ful leer, and now an amorous glance? Soft 
words are whispered, and an effort made to 
show off graces, and lay trains for flirtations. 
At length the night is far spent, and the morn- 
ing's dawn compels the gay revellers to desist. 
They seek their homes ; but when the rising 
sun pours forth his beams, and the time arrives 
to engage in the duties of the day, where are 
these devotees of pleasure ? They still press 
the downy pillow ; and at midday, when roused 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OP PLEASUBE. 67 

from their nneasy slumbers, for what are they 
prepared ? Are they refreshed by this Bight 
of revelry ? Alas, how much the reverse ! 

We cannot look into the heart, but words 
and actions plainly reveal the state of the soul. 
What an indifference is manifested for the com- 
mon employments of the day. The gay scene 
of the previous. night seems to glitter before 
them. That pressure of the hand, that warm 
embrace, that look of admiration, that flatter- 
ing compliment, that whirl of pleasure, how 
captivating! How dull and lonesome seems 
our fair friend, how little interest she manifests 
in the pleasures of home. Nothing, it would 
seem, can rouse her energies or awaken joyous 
emotions, but the anticipation of another scene 
of festive gayety. 

Is it not then evident that dancing, as usu- 
ally practised, does not answer the purpose for 
which a recreation is designed ; that it refreshes 
neither body nor mind ; but that, on the other 
hand, it unfits for the performance of duty? 
Are not these fashionable assemblies a wicked 
waste of time, and is not the money thus spent 
worse than thrown away ? 

Is merely a temporary injury sustained? 
In regard to the body, how often are disease 

3* 

Digitized by LnOOQlC 



68 TOUNO LADY OP PLEA8UBE. 

and death the consequence of these midnight 
scenes of dissipation. And what is the influ- 
ence npon the mind ? Is this amusement con- 
ducive to its healthy exercise, or to an increase 
of intellectual power ? This I never heard ad- 
vanced even by its warmest supporters. 

Inquiring once of a friend, what was his 
success in an eflfort to carry on a literary soci- 
ety in a certain village, he replied that there 
were **too many dancing- parties to expect 
much success; for," said he, ''where there is 
so much attention to the heels, there is little 
chance for head-work." And so it proved; 
for as the dancing-parties continued, the liter- 
ary society came to an untimely end. 

That time thus spent increases moral pow- 
er, seems quite too absurd an idea to demand 
attention. Who can but admit that the ten- 
dency is to produce a vain, frivolous, trifling, 
pleasure-loving habit of mind, which *'not only 
takes away the inclination, but the capacity 
for higher pursuits?" Manifold are the in- 
stances that prove its deadjiy influence upon 
the soul. 

The eflfects of dancing are, however, best 
learned by experience ; and the testimony of 
the learned and pious Dr. Adam Clarke, con- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. S9 

ceming the effect produced npon his character 
by indulging in this fascinating amusement, I 
feel disposed to transcribe, as I think you will 
be interested in it, and what he says will prob- 
ably have more influence upon the advocates 
of dancing than what either you or I can say. 
" I learned to dance. I grew passionately 
fond of it ; would scarcely walk but in meas- 
ured time, and was constantly tripping, mov- 
ing, and shuffling at all times and in all places. 
I grew impatient of control, was fond of com- 
pany, and wished to mingle more than I had 
ever done with young people. I also got a 
passion for better clothing than that which fell 
to my lot in life, and was discontented when I 
found a neighbor's son dressed better than my- 
self. I lost the spirit of subordination, did not 
love work, imbibed a spirit of idleness, and in 
short, drank in all the brain-sickening effluvia 
of pleasure. The authority of my parents wm 
feared indeed, but not respected, and few seri- 
ous impressions could prevail in a mind im- 
bued now with frivolity. I in no case kept any 
improper company ; nevertheless dancing was 
to me a perverting influence, an unmixed moral 
evil. It drowned the voice of a well-instructed 
conscience, and was the first cause of impelling 



y Google 



60 YOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

me to seek my happiness in this life. And I 
can testify that, as far as my observations have 
extended, and they have had a pretty wide 
range, I have known it to produce in others 
the same evils that it produced in me. I con- 
sider it therefore as a branch of that worldly 
education which leads from heaven to earth, 
from things spiritual- to things sensual, from 
God to Satan. Let them plead for it who will, 
I know it to be evil, and that only. They 
who bring up their children in this way, or 
send them to those schools where dancing is 
taught, are consecrating them to the service of 
Moloch. *No man in his senses will dance,' 
says Cicero, a heathen. Shame on those Chris- 
tians who advocate a cause by which many 
sons have become profligate and many daugh- 
ters ruined." 

With this long quotation I must close my 
letter, hoping that you may receive much profit 
from what I have written, and may do much 
good to others. 

Yours aflFectionately, 

M. STANLEY. 



Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 61 



LETTER VII- 

MY DEAR FRIEND: 

Your letter is received, and has been read 
not by myself alone, bnt by my friends. Misses 
Doty, Macy, and Lee are almost as mnch inter- 
ested in the subject as I am. We wonder now 
that we could have been so nndisceming as not 
to be aware of the influence of this vain amuse- 
ment. At a little social gathering the other 
evening this was the chief subject of conversa- 
tion, and of course there was no time found for 
dancing. Still, there are those who do not like 
to give it up; and are disposed to say every 
thing possible in favor of their favorite recre- 
ation, so that we sometimes have quite a dis- 
cussion, and argue with all our might. By the 
aid received from your letters, our side, how- 
ever, generally comes off victorious, or at least 
our opponents are so nonplussed that they do 
not know what to say ; .but I rather think in 
their case the old proverb is verified, **He that 
is convinced against his will, is of the same 
opinion stilL" 

There is one point, however, upon which 1 be- 



Digitized byCjOOQlC 



62 TOUNO LADT OP PLEASURE. 

lieve you have said nothing, namely, that danc- 
ing is an accomplishment, indispensable to the 
attainment of gentility. I really do not know 
what to say against those who urge its great 
importance in producing ease and gracefulness 
of manners. I am sure that stiffness, or even 
awkwardness, would be preferable to a want of 
moral purity j and I do not think the most ex- 
quisite gentility would excuse an act of immo- 
rality ; nor do I see how any thing that excites 
vanity or haughtiness can render one truly 
polite. ■ • . ' 

If dancing is an accomplishment so essential 
in forming the manners, I should think those 
not initiated into this art wbuld be very awk- 
ward^ and ungenteel ; but I am sure I never 
observed any remarkable difference, in this re- 
spect, between the dancers and those who do 
not dance. 

How much to the purpose is that quotation 
from Dr. Clarke, in showing what is really the 
influence of this amusement. A love of dress, 
and a dissatisfaction with what one has, and 
with the business that ought to be performed, 
I suppose, must be common with those who 
are absorbed in this method of receiving pleas- 
ure. I think Dr. Clarke's ideas on this subject 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 63 

will have much influence. You also have had 
opportunity to learn the influence of dancing 
upon the character, as you have been much in 
the society of young people. You have presided 
over a family of young ladies, and had the best 
opportunity to decide whether the dancers are 
more distinguished than others for politeness, 
which is defined to be, '* kindness kindly ex- 
pressed" — more disposed to promote the happi- 
ness of the domestic circle, and more willing to 
deny themselves that others may be accommo- 
dated, I have often heard it said, that "it 
does not produce or express a feeling kindly, 
to place a foot, a hand, or the head, according 
to Lord Chesterfield's rules," so that I suppose 
we must look at something besides bodily mo- 
tion for real politeness. 

Do you recollect Mr. , a gentleman 

who had been travelling in Europe, that called 
upon you a year or two since? I remember 
his making what seemed to me then a very 
singular remark. The subject of dancing was 
mentioned, and he said that this amusement 
was not practised in the best society, either 
on this side of the Atlantic or the other. I 
thought that probably he was not admitted, at 
least in foreign lands, into the first circles, and 

Digitized by CjOOQ IC 



64 YOUNG. LADY OP PLEASURE. 

therefore could not certainly know this to be 
true. Whether this is so or not, it is yery 
certain that, on this side the Atlantic, there are 
people of high standing who are not devoted to 
dancing. Still, there are persons of good judg- 
ment and true piety who seem to think it es- 
sential to a polite education, as, for instance, 

Miss J , who has it taught in her seminary. 

I wish therefore you would give me your views 
on the subject as presented in this light. 

In the quotation from Dr. Clarke is this 
remark, **No man in his senses will dance, 
says Cicero." Cicero was a heathen, and I 
thought all heathen nations approved of this 
amusement. I wonder whether Cicero, the re- 
nowned orator, was inferior to his countrymen 
in grace and elegance, and was opposed to that 
which would promote their refineihent. 

I have another question to propose. If the 
amusements most common are not what they 
should be, or are so practised as to produce 
evil results, still, as some kind of recreation is 
necessary for the health both of body and mind, 
ought not persons of experience and wisdom 
to give attention to the subject, and tell the 
poor ignorant ones how they shall amuse thern^ 
selves? 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 65 

There are many kinds of sports, I know, in 
whicli children find pleasure, and I have often 
been pleased with their ingenuity in contriv- 
ing plays; but those that are older seem to 
need advice in respect to their recreations, as 
they often make great mistakes. 

I have been led to these thoughts in con- 
triving something to take the place of dancing 
in our evening circles. We do not care to 
practise gymnastics ; and silly plays, I am sure, 
are not the thing for persons who have had the 
advantages for education that we have enjoy- 
ed, and who are now, many of us, out of our 
teens. 

You used to recommend to your pupils, 
after leaving the seminary, the formation of 
societies among their associates, for improving 
their minds ; and that at these meetings there 
should be reading selected from good authors, 
and also original pieces, or a paper sustained 
by the members of the circle. 

All these things I have been considering, 
and I will tell you what I think we can do here. 
We can meet together one afternoon in a week 
and read something interesting and profitable, 
but I do not think it would be best to say any 
thing about having a paper, at least not at first. 



y Google 



66 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBK 

That **Chapomaii Society," which Mrs. 

R used to tell us about, of which she 

was a member in h^r youthful days, always 
interested me much. I often thought that 
when I left school, I would try to have some- 
thing of the kind among my associates. I think 
these ladies called it the **Chaponian Society," 
from their admiration of Mrs. Chapone, an 
English writer whose ** Letters to Young La- 
dies" they were accustomed to read, and from 
which they derived much profit and pleasure. 
I should infer that the members of this society 
were not as much given to the reading of stories 
as young people now are. 

I do not know as very many of my com- 
panions here will be disposed to attend a read- 
ing circle ; but there are a number who have* 
finished their school education, that I think 
will be pleased with the plan. I have suggest- 
ed it to three or four, who are willing to unite 
with me in making a beginning, and there are 
others that probably will soon join with us. 
Several have said they would like it very well 
if there was to be no writing. We propose to 
have a little music ; and we shall soon obtain 
so many ideas which we wish to express to 
each other, that we may find pleasure as well 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 67 

as improvement in exercising our conversa- 
tional powers. At some future time our minds 
may become so well furnished, and our facility 
for expression so increased, that we can sustain 
a paper. 

Now, my dear Miss Stanley, please give us 
some encouraging words, and also some advice 
in regard to the books we shall read. Your 
affectionate 

MABIA. 



y Google 



68 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 



LETTER VIII. 

Your letter was to me full of interest. I 
rejoice to know that my Maria is not only de- 
cided in giving up amusements which have no 
good influence, but that she is intent on ascer- 
taining what will be really beneficial, and also 
in earnest to induce her companions to seek 
pleasure in that which is worthy the atten- 
tion of rational and immortal beings. It is 
indeed important that a right direction in re- 
gard to recreations should be given to those 
who are young and inexperienced. I have 
often been pained to hear mothers excuse 
themselves for indulging their children in go- 
ing to places of vain amusement by saying, 
** I remember how it was with me when I was 
young, and children will be children; when 
they are older they will see the folly of it ; 
they must learn by experience, as I did." This 
surely is not training up a child in the way he 
should go. Is it not permitting him to take 
the direction of his wayward nature, with the 
expectation that after discovering himself in 
the wrong course, he will seek to find the right 
way himself? 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 69 

When I was about seventeen, a dancing- 
school was commenced in the place where we 
resided ; and I recollect saying to my school- 
mates, **I shall not go, because my parents do 
not think it right." A companion of mine, 
whose father was in favor of her attendance, 
was induced to decline through the influence 
of her mother, a woman eminent for piety and 
devotion to the best interests of her children. 
She, when consulted in reference to going to 
this school, took her Bible, and marking down 
the chapter and verse where passages are to 
be found in which the duty of parents to their 
children is plainly taught, gave the paper to 
her daughter, desiring her to turn to these 
passages and read them carefully. Then said 
she, **If in view of my obligation to follow 
these divine directions, you think it right for 
me, a Christian mother, to give you permission 
to attend the dancing-school, you may go." 
The young lady as directed perused .carefully 
the scripture precepts, then laying aside her 
Bible, replied, **No, mother, I do not think 
you would do right in giving me this permis- 
sion, and I shall not attend." The dancing- 
school went on, but this young lady was found 
at the prayer-meeting, instead of this place of 



y Google 



70 TOUNa LADY OF PLEASURE. 

amusement. Her subsequent history is that 
she became a Christian while young, and as 
the wife of a clergyman has been and still is 
eminently useful. 

That Mr. C whom you mention, I rec- 
ollect ; and I have recently heard him preach 
a sermon on the subject of amusements. In 
this he showed very plainly the inconsistency 
and evil influence of dancing. He said that 
among its supporters We should find those op- 
posed to religion, missions, temperance ; while 
among those by whom it is condemned may be 
found persons distinguished for piety, intelli- 
gence, and devotion to the cause of benevo- 
lence ; in short, the brightest ornaments to 
society. He said also that dancing in ancient 
times was less objectionable than at present ; 
that in the twenty places where it is men- 
tioned in Scripture, there is not one instance 
where it is said to have been performed by 
both sexes together. 

The greater the mental cultivation, the less 
the disposition to engage in trifling pursuits ; 
hence the amusements in which persons most 
delight furnish a clue to the intellectual char- 
acter. You will find an illustration of this in 
your efforts to induce your companions to unite 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 71 

in a reading circle. Those who are intellectaal 
will enter with interest into the plan, while the 
superficially educated will think an evening^ 
spent in reading must be very dull. I am 
however sure that you will find this method 
of social enjoyment very delightfiil, though I 
think it wise not to propose having a paper at 
first. It is a great change to have reading 
take the place of dancing. Music will add to 
the entertainment, and perhaps this may be 
an inducement for some to attend; but the 
idea of being required to compose something 
to be read before the circle would be quite 
startling, and famish a reason to many for 
staying away. 

In regard to the selection of reading, there 
are so many good books, that you may find it 
difficult to decide which to choose. Something 
interesting, pithy, and that will impress such 
thoughts as it is important for you always to 
remember, will of course be good. There are 
many books that contain useful hints,, but of 
which it may be said that there is a bushel of 
chaff for a few kernels of wheat. Such would 
hardly be suitable for your circle, for at one 
reading you might get nothing but chaff. Han- 
nah More has written much that is worthy of 



y Google 



72 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

very careful perusal ; but I dare say your la- 
dies would think her too dry. It will be nec- 
essary to consult the members of your circle in 
regard to the selection of reading, as concert 
of action is desirable ; and you will find your- 
selves intent on sharing with each other the 
rich gems of thought that have rewarded your 
research in exploring the treasures of other 
minds. 

It is desirable that your conversation should 
be connected with what you read, and that you 
should beware of gossip, scandal, and all this 
family of vices. The proper way to avoid this 
kind of intercourse, is to occupy the attention 
with subjects of importance; for ** jealousy, 
envy, discontent, and love of scandal, are evil 
spirits that take possession of an empty mind." 
We hardly realize how great is the influence 
of conversation. Some one has said that **at 
home it does more to educate children than 
schools and colleges." It is therefore very 
necessary to cultivate the power of expressing 
ourselves with ease and beauty; and we can- 
not attain this ability without practice — ^not 
the practice of talking without thinking, but of 
entering with s6 much interest into the theme 
that there will be a natural flow of thought. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 73 

Your reading circle will present a very fine 
opportunity for the exercise of your conversa- 
tional powers. 

Perhaps you are not aware that dancing is 
contrary to the rules of our church, whose rep- 
resentative body, as you know, is not com- 
posed merely of ministers, but of laymen, 
some of them occupying stations of eminence 
in the state as well as in the church ; and all 
evangelical denominations take essentially the 
same stand. It is not many years since a lady, 
for attending dancing-parties, was suspended 
from the church of which I was a member. 

It is to me a very sad change that has come 
over the religious community ; for what does it 
evince ? Can it be regarded as an evidence of 
an increase of piety, of devotion to the service 
of Christ, and of deadness to the world? My 
hope is that the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, 
with which many places in our land have been 
blessed, will produce a mighty renovation ; so 
that meetings for religious conversation and 
prayer will take the place of dancing-parties, 
and Christians give evidence that they find 
their enjoyment in living for the glory of God 
and doing his will. 

I have been reading something to-day very 
4 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



74 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

strikingly illustrative of living for this blessed 
purpose ; and I have received so much pleas- 
ure, that I think you will be interested ia some 
account of it. It is the review of a work lately 
published, giving a history of the settlement in 
Pitcairn's island, or, as it is now denominated, 
" The Paraidise of the Pacific." You recollect, 
perhaps, that this island was settled more than 
sixty years ago by the mutineers of the ship 
Bounty. These persons took with them some 
Otaheitan women, so that the colony was of 
rather a mixed character. 

The part of the narrative, however, jto which 
I wish to call your attention, is that which de- 
scribes the great moral change in this people, 
and the means by which it was effected. After 
the death of all the mutineers but one, the last 
survivor, John Adams, having become a good 
and praying man, and possessing the treasure 
of one Bible, made known to the ignorant and 
vicious community around him its blessed 
truths. A father to this youthful group, he 
trained them up in the fear and love of God, 
morning and evening reading to them the sa- 
cred Scriptures, and bowing with them before 
the mercy-seat. They gave heed to his in- 
structions, and by the simple teaching of these 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 76 

divine oracles, the inhabitants of this island 
have become as happy a community as can be 
found in our world. This island, a mere speck 
in the wide waste of waters, rises a paradise 
from the ocean. Why is this? Because here 
Grod is feared and loved. ** At night not an 
eye is closed without offering the heart's in- 
cense to tbeir almighty Guardian." 

I tbink the question might here be asked, 
whether we do not find in this island more real 
politeness than in the circles of fashion, and 
among tbose who thread the mazy dance in the 
splendid parlors of our cities. A visitor to 
the island says, ^'The dress-makers of London 
^onld be delighted with the simplicity and ele- 
gant taste of these untaught females." Another 
visitor, in his description, speaks of their "faces 
beaming with smiles, and wearing an air of 
modesty that would do honor to the most 
virtuous." "Harmony, simplicity, sincerity, 
cheerfulness, hospitality, contentment, afiPec- 
tion to each other, and devotion to the duties 
of religion," are traits of character for which 
these people are distinguished. We may well 
inquire if these accomplishments are not supe- 
rior to any that, can be attained under the tui- 
tion of a Parisian dancing-master. 

Digitized by CjOOQIC 



76 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

Your idea is very much to the purpose, 
that if dancing is so necessary to render one 
genteel, those poor damsels who have never 
learned to " step their 'minuets well," must be 
very uncouth in their manners. Perhaps one 
as destitute of these accomplishments as your 
teacher ought not to presume to decide so ab- 
struse a point, but leave it to the decision of 
more able reasoners, the fashionables of the 
day. She will, however, hazard some thoughts. 

It is very possible that one who has never 
danced might not turn her toes at quite the 
right angle, nor always lift the foot in exact 
time, nor give the scrape in the right direction, 
nor the fashionable squeeze in the proper place 
or with due force; indeed, she might not throw 
such fascinating glances, nor utter words in 
tones so soft and with such melting pathos as 
the belle of the ballroom. But whether she 
might not be as quick to hear a cry of distress, 
as prompt to relieve a suflPering fellow-being, 
as gentle and kind in the chamber of sickness, 
or as sympathizing a friend to the mourner, is 
not so doubtful. Indeed, it is not at all im- 
probable that she might eclipse the beautiful 
belle in a social circle; not exactly by turn- 
ing her heels* and toes according to the most 



y Google . 



r UNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 77 

approved Parisian mode, but by her modest 
demeanor, her intellectoal countenance, her 
flow of thought, and her brilliant conversa- 
tional powers. That person is truly attractive 
whose face, while it beams with intelligence, 
is expressive of a warm, open, unselfish heart. 
Not attractive perhaps to a set of admirers 
whose only standard of excellence is the dress 
and the movements of the body, but attractive 
to those who estimate the character by the 
soul ; who regard the mind as the true standard. 
A person distinguished for her moral and intel- 
lectual attainments, even though plainly attired, 
may be considered the accomplished lady, rath- 
er than the gay belle, splendidly arrayed in the 
latest feshion and decked with expensive orna- 
ments, who, having no interest in conversation, 
thinks it very dull unless she can get up a 
cotillion or a polka. How really pitiable the 
condition of the poor restless creature, who 
seems to consider it quite impossible to endure 
the dulness of an evening without a dance. 

This want of mental cultivation, this vacu- 
ity of thought, is what renders this amusement 
so desirable, as it gives an opportunity for the 
superficially educated to display their charms. 
An excitement is thus produced, relieving the 

Digitized by CjOOQIC 



78 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

ennui of those who have few other attractions 
than these movements of the body by which to 
secure attention and excite admiration. Danc- 
ing is a contrivance t(5 kill time; not indeed 
the only contrivance, but one among many by 
which to pass it away without thought or ra- 
tional conversation. If such be the nature and 
use of this accomplishment, I would beg to be 
excused from acquiring it, and would risk the 
danger of being considered unfashionabllB and 
unpolished, rather than thus waste my precious 
moments, and hazard my immortal soul. 

Thfs idea that dancing is essential to a po- 
lite education results from a mistake in regard* 
to what is really the nature of true politeness. 
Many seem to have no other idea of graceful- 
ness of manners, than that it is the performance 
of various evolutions in the most approved style, 
as in military tactics. Addison, in some of his 
papers in the Spectator, with his usual keen- 
ness of sarcasm, throws ridicule upon this opin- 
ion. His directions for the use of the fan fur- 
nish a good illustration. 

This kind of gentility is far from rendering 
one agreeable, for being. practised only on par- 
ticular occasions, the effort is apparent, and 
without ease there can be no gracefulness of 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 79 

manners. In affecting airs and graces which 
are not natural, there is also danger of over- 
doing, and of becoming so exquisite in speech 
and action as to excite risibility, rather than 
gain the admiration so much desired. Oen- 
nine politeness is quite the opposite of this. 
Having its seat in the heart, there is nothing 
artificial in its exercise. It is not a mere com- 
pliance with forms to be used on certain occa- 
sions, as in the drawing-room with company, 
and laid aside in one's own family. It is true 
that those really polite will conform to all the 
customs of society, so far as they are in accord- 
ance with the great rule of right, doing this 
from a desire to promote the happiness of those 
with whom they associate. The old adage you 
recollect: "Politeness is kindness kindly ex- 
pressed.^^ Haughtiness, vanity, ill- temper, 
self-conceit, and all passions of which selfish- 
ness is the root, are therefore inconsistent with 
politeness ; while humility, meekness, modesty, 
and benevolence are the graces of the soul, 
which produce gracefulness of manner. Those 
'who from the heart comply with the gospel 
precepts, "Love thy neighbor as thyself," 
"Let each esteem other better than them- 
selves," "Be kindly -affectioned one toward 



y Google 



80 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

another, in honor preferring one another," are 
persons of true politeness; while thoSe who 
ceremoniously comply with such directions, 
without the heart, have noc the spirit, but 
only the form of that which is so highly es- 
teemed, and which, it is claimed by some, can. 
only be attained by becoming an accomplished 
dancer. 

It is true, indeed, that proficients in this 
accomplishment may be more at ease in fash- 
ionable society than those accustomed to min- 
gle merely with a select circle of friends ; for 
as their habits are formed in a crowded assem- 
bly, they become adepts in the varied round 
of ceremonies there deemed essential, and thus 
attain such a degree of boldness as renders 
them quite self-possessed. But the embarrass- 
ment felt by young persons when going into 
company may be prevented by their observing 
the rules of politeness at home. The taste 
must be cultivated, as well as a habit of atten- 
tion, that one may be familiar with the customs 
of good society ; while to think little of self, 
and much of rendering others happy, is the 
great secret of producing ease of manners in 
any company. 

In large and mixed assemblages, persons 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 81 

of either sex often practise arts to attract the 
other, and thns to secure admiration ; th6se flat- 
tering attentions oonstitatii^ the charm of these 
places of amusement It is also to be feared, 
that in the exercise of these fascinations there 
is a loss of that delicacy which is a shining 
ornament of the character, as well as an infu- 
sion of such thoughts as pollute the soul. 

That dancing in mixed assemblies does 
have a tendency to produce an impurity of 
mind, I once heard asserted by a lecturer on 
oriental customs ; and he also spoke of it as a 
fact admitted by attentive observers in all na- 
tions. This declaration at first startled me, but 
it led me, in searching for its truth, to exam- 
ine all the means of information to which I had 
access. With the result of my researches I 
will make you acquainted in another letter.* 

Before I close, I would suggest that prob- 
ably your reading-circle would be interested 
in "The Paradise of the Pacific," by Rev. Mr. 
Murray. If you cannot obtain that, you can 
read the review, in the number for August, 
1853, of the Eclectic. 

Yours affectionately, 

M. STAXLE7. 

4* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



82 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 



LETTER IX. 

MY DEAB MISS STANLEY: 

At our reading circle on Thursday what do 
you think we read? Your letter had just been 
received, and as it was exactly what I wanted 
to say, I could not well do otherwise than give 
your words instead of my own. I have no 
doubt you think this was a wise course, much 
better than if your thoughts h^d come to the 
ladies of our circle second-hand/ All were 
much gratified, and request me to ask you if 
they may not always enjoy this pleasure with 
me. After the reading, having received so 
many new ideas, we had an animated conver- 
sation, which I assure you was very pleasant. 

We were greatly interested in your account 
of ** The Paradise of the Pacific.^' Some of us 
recollected the story of its first settlement, but 
we knew nothing of its present state. I found 
the number of the Eclectic which you mention- 
ed, and though we had reading selected, that 
was laid aside for the review. In the history 
of this little community, how clearly we can 
see that doing right makes one happy; and 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF FLEASUBE. 83 

that the true way to find the right is to study 
the Bible. I think some people in our own 
highly favored land might take lessons from 
these simple-hearted islanders. 

What a treasure was that single Bible, and 
how much good was done by that one man, 
John Adams. What a kind providence too, 
that Mr. Nobbs was there, and ready to take 
the place of their teacher when he was remov- 
ed by death. 

In this narrative we find facts more won- 
derful than fiction. The state of things in this 
island comes nearer to my idea of a Utopian 
scene than any thing of which I have ever read. 
It really show^ that those who go according to 
the Bible are the truly polite. 

There were some things in your letter new 
to us all. We had no idea that dancing as an 
amusement had been so generally condemned 
by the various denominations of evangelical 
Christians. I* knew that some of my friends, 
as well as yourself, thought it wrong to attend 
balls and dancing-parties. I also supposed 
that persons of the most eminent piety were of 
this opinion, so that I was surprised to find the 
members of the church here taking such a dif- 
ferent stand, even the minister and deacons 



y Google 



84 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 

approving of this amnsement. I also heard 
not long since, that a minister who stands very 
high in the churches, sends his children to & 
dancing-school, and that in the city where he 
resides this amusement is common among pious 
people. 

This difference of opinion among those who 
are professors of religion, after all that you have 
said by way of explanation, does seem very 
hard to understand. I suppose, however, that 
some religious people look only at reasons in 
favor of this exercise, and others at the evils 
connected with it, and so come to different con- 
clusions. It seems to me that if the teachings 
of our Saviour were more studied. Christians, 
even if they thought it right to dance, would 
refrain from promiscuous dancing in view of its 
consequences, and if for no other reason. Test 
they should grieve the ''little ones" that be- 
lieve in Him. 

I know it is often the case that if the father 
desires his children to acquire this accomplish- 
ment, the mother thinks it cannot be avoided. 
There are few mothers who exercise as much 
wisdom, and who act so fully in accordance 
with their sense of obligation, as the one you 
mentioned. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 85 

I have somewhere read, that Harriet New- 
ell the missionary, who when a child had been 
carefully instracted bj her pioos mother, man- 
ifested at an early age much interest in relig- 
ion, morning and evening reading the word of 
•God, and engaging in secret prayer ; but, that 
after attending the dancing-school in accord- 
ance with her father's wishes, these impres* 
sioDLS were effaced, and for a time she was very 
thoughtless. One thing is, however, certain, 
that when she became a Christian she gave up 
all these amusements. If attending the danc- 
ing-school is necessary to gracefulness of man- 
ners, this certainly is attained at a great cost; 
for, as in the case of Harriet Newell, serious 
impressions are thus almost sure to be effaced. 
I should not think that those who are anxious 
for the conversion of their children, could be 
willing, to put them under influences which are 
quite certain to prevent their most earnest de- 
sires from being realized. 

I think what you say is very true, that the 
reason dancing is thought so essential to a po- 
lite education is because people have a wrong 
idea of what politeness is. I used to think it 
was doing things in a particular way, speaking 
soft, tripping very lightly, and looking prim^ 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



86 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

and that I could put on these graces and lay 
them aside when I pleased. I am sure I did 
not think of its haying any thing to do with the 
heart. I have often noticed that girls wfio are 
very mde at home make a great display in 
company. I do not think those in your school 
who were most fashionable, were distinguished 
for respect to their teachers, for they were very 
apt to be ringleaders in what was opposed to 
your wishes. There was that clique of young 

ladies from B , who were so in love with this 

amusement that they could hardly get through 
a recess without a dance, yet they were noted 
for their disregard of the rules of propriety. 
They would be drumming with their fingers or 
feet, whispering and giggling among themselves, 
and no more graceful in their manners than 
other people. 

An instance of this kind of rudeness I can- 
not help mentioning. Some people of this 
fe;Shionable class, and one of them formerly a 
pupil in your school, were visiting at an uncle's. 
One evening these visitors suggested that as 
there was a piano they might have a dance. 
The uncle and aunt were pious and conscien- 
tious ; they felt that they could not consistently 
give their consent, though they expressed re- 

Digitized byCjOQQlC 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 87 

gret at being nnable to gratify their yoang 
cousins. The visitors, however, were so intent 
npon having this pleasure, that they persisted 
in sittii^ up to a late hour, or until uncle and 
aunt found it necessary to retire, and then had 
their dance. 

Another family of a similar character suf- 
fered a similar annoyance. The visitors, al- 
though they knew that the friends With whom 
they were staying disapproved of this amuse- 
ment, yet without even asking permission, for 
nights in succession disturbed the family till a 
late hour by their music and dancing ; and 
this they continued to do until requested to 
cease. 

I am sure such politeness as this must be of 
a spurious kind. There may be suppleness of 
joints and muscles, but very little tenderness 
about the heart. The ''kindness kindly ex- 
pressed" seems to be wanting. 

I anticipate much from your next letter. 
Your own 

MAEIA. 



y Google 



88 TOUNQ LADY OF PLEASUBE. 



LETTER X. 

MY DEABMABIA: 

Yours was duly received and read with 
pleasure. I do not object to my letters doing 
all the good they can ; and if your companions 
are interested in the subject of our correspond- 
ence, I am not unwilling they should be read 
in your circle. 

I promised, I believe, to give you a his- 
tory of dancing, and to show how it has been 
regarded in its influence upon character. We 
have seen that in ancient nations it was per- 
formed as an act of religious worship, and as 
such was practised by the most reverential, 
and therefore the most worthy. Being, how- 
ever, a natural expression of gladness, it be- 
came a common method of giving vent to joy- 
ful emotions, and therefore, in accordance with 
the disposition of the heart, was employed 
either as an amusement or an act of worship. 
This, we discover, was the case among the 
Hebrews; for Michal, endeavoring to throw 
odium upon the religious exultation of David, 
compares him to the * * vain fellows " who shame- 



itized by Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 89 

lessly uncover themselves ; allading evidently 
to those who for amusement engaged in this 
exercise, and the manner in which it was per- 
formed. Also in the book of Job, the children 
of those who contemn God, or who say, ** What 
is the Almighty, that we should serve him ?'^ 
are said to dance, also to '' take the timbrel 
and harp, and to rejoice at the sound of the 
organ." The dance of the daughter of Hero- 
dias was of this character. It was evidently 
performed for the amusement of the company, 
and the request in which she united with her 
mother indicates that all were under the influ- 
ence of unholy passions. 

In Greece, dancing was employed in the 
worship of the gods, and Apollo was consid- 
ered as presiding over this exercise, as well as 
over music and other fine arts. Jupiter is even 
said to have been the first dancing-master. 
The character of the god worshipped had how- 
ever an influence upon that of the people, and 
of course upon the manner in which this cere- 
mony of religious worship was performed. At 
the same time there was a reflex influence ; the 
character of the people indicating the charac- 
ter they believed their god to possess, and the 
vices to which they were addicted leading them 



y Google 



90. YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

to ascribe such attributes to their deities as 
werie in accordance with the desires of their 
corrupt hearts, probably that the comrais- 
eion of evil deeds might be excused or looked 
upon with approbation. Thus Bacchus was 
the protector of drunkards, and Mercury of 
thieves ; and we hence perceive that the par- 
ticular cast of character and taste for pleasure 
had an influence upon religious ceremonies, 
and these again upon national character. 

That there was a great difference between 
the Dorians and lonians, is apparent in tracing 
the history of Athens and Sparta, the leading 
cities of these two races. This is discovered 
in reading any G-recian history ; but Muller, a 
late German historian, makes the contrast more 
striking than we should infer from the histories 
which are commonly used. The Spartans, the 
representatives of the Doric race, we know 
from the account we have of the laws of Ly- 
curgus, were a people of amazing self-control 
and self-denial. Miiller says they were much 
more moral than the Athenians ; and this cer- 
tainly it is not hard to admit, for the Athe- 
nians had the pleasure-loving taste which was 
a marked feature of the lonians. It is true 
that the worship of Minerva the goddess of 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 91 

wisdom must have imparted an elevating in- 
fluence, which rendered them superior to other 
branches of this race. The lonians of Western 
Asia were devoted to luxurious pleasures ; and 
the Diana worshipped by the Ephesians was 
of such a character, that her festivals were the 
'* gala of licentious passions f while the Diana 
of the Spartans was the goddess of chastity, 
and of course devotion to her must have tended 
to cherish this virtue. 

The worship of Bacchus, the god of wine, 
was attended with orgies which sometimes be- 
came so intolerable, that laws were passed 
against them. The word Bacchanalian, de- 
rived from Bacchus, indicates the character of 
these rites. In Cyprus, Venus was the pre- 
siding deity, and to this day effeminacy and 
licentiousness are a characteristic of this peo- 
ple. 

Apollo was the presiding deity of the Doric 
race. He, you will recollect, was the god of 
music and of all elegant exercises. He is rep- 
resented as the "embodiment of genius," "the 
perfection of order, harmony, and proportion." 
Apollo and Diana were the children of Jupi- 
ter, and looked upon as the manifestation of 
his divinity to man. Apollo was believed to 



y Google 



92 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

reside at Delphi, and hence that famous tem- 
ple and oracle, which was visited by all G-reece 
and Western Asia for the purpose of consult- 
ing this god and becoming acquainted with his 
will. Apollo is represented in mythology as 
visiting the Hyperboreans, a nation very dear 
to him, and dancing and playing with them 
from the vernal equinox to the early setting of 
the Pleiades, then returning to Delphi with 
their offerings, the full ripe ears of corn, the 
first fruits of their land. 

If the gods were believed to engage in such 
exercises, it was natural that music and danc- 
ing should be employed by the Spartans in 
their worship ; but with their estimation of the 
character of Apollo and Diana, and with the 
control of the animal appetites and passions, 
considered by them so noble, we can easily 
admit that these exercises must have been 
very different in their influence from what they 
were when expressive of the softer passions or 
of the amorous feelings. The beautiful god 
J Apollo was represented ** with his harp in hand, 
leading the muses and mingling in the dance ;" 
and in his worship the music which accompa- 
nied the dance was '*an ode or an address to 
the gods, calculated to compose and clear the 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 88 

mind, to soothe and calm the spirita, not to 
tonch and excite the passions ;" their thoughts 
and movements all aiming to be in accordance 
with their god, ''as the standard bj which all 
their activity was measured." This, it would 
seem, furnishes an example of dancing of an 
elevated and intellectual character, orlhe mu- 
sic of motion combined with that of sound, ver j 
unlike that performed for mere amusement, 
and so exciting to the amorous feelings as to 
have a corrupting influence. It was a relig- 
ious use of this exercise, but quite a contrast 
to that performed in the worship of Bacchus 
and Venus. 

Bat among the Greeks as well as the He- 
brews, dancing was not only performed in 
religious worship; it was also resorted to as 
an amusement. In Athens, so renowned for 
her poets, sculptors, architects, and painters, 
we find a class of women distinguished for their 
expertness in dancing and music. Selected 
probably on account of exquisite beauty of 
form and feature, they were better educated 
than other females, receiving a knowledge of all 
the accomplishments art could bestow. This 
seemed to be for the purpose of fitting them 
to minister to the pleasure of the nobler sex ; 



y Google 



94 YQUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

and so fascinating were their manners and 
so irresistible their attractions, as to draw 
around them philosophers, poets, and orators. 
To some of these beautiful beings, contempo- 
rary with Socrates and Plato, we are intro- 
duced by the historian ; as for instance, Lais, 
Callisto, Nico, and Aspasia. You recollect 
Aspasia, fascinating by her charms not only 
Pericles, but the wise Socrates himself. Of 
Lais it was said, **She is the one woman in 
Greece who carries all before her." When 
we inquire for the moral character of this class 
of females, we learn that they were called He- 
taerae, or, as we should say, courtesans. With 
dancing was combined the power of music ; and 
these arts, rendered still more exciting to the 
amorous passions by scanty costume, lascivious 
looks and gestures, were used to lure the un- 
wary to deeds of which it is a shame to speak. 
So notorious was the immorality of this class of 
females, that even among heathen they could 
not be respected; and the profession of a dancer 
was, according to Plato, looked upon as **low 
and disgraceful." The attention paid by Per- 
icles to Aspasia, for a time, it is said, removed 
something of the odium attached to the Hetae- 
r8B, thus rendering vice more reputable and 



DrQitized by Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 96 

producing a deeper corruption among the peo- 
ple. This profession belonged exclusively to 
females, probably because women were consid- 
ered as especially designed to minister to the 
pleasure of the nobler sex, or perhaps because 
they were capable of becoming more captivat- 
ing charmers. Plato, however, objects to this 
kind of amusement, and suggests that persons 
capable of higher enjoyments, such, for in- 
stance, as intellectual conversation, should not 
suffer themselves to become absorbed in pleas- 
ures calculated merely to inflame the passions. 
The Hetaerae seem to have been a resource for 
those who had little enjoyment at home ; and 
probably Socrates, worn out by the scolding 
of his wife Xantippe, found a pleasant relief in 
the society of Aspasia. 

Females generally, even in Athens, were 
uneducated, therefore greatly inferior to the 
other sex, and unfitted for companionship with 
men of philosophic mind and refinement of 
taste ; hence we discover, as the Hetaerae were 
some of them highly educated, why their society 
was sought by men of this class. We are also 
taught the importance of cultivation of mind 
to the female, and that the duty of woman is to 
acquire such a character as will enable her to 



y Google 



96 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

make home happy ; her aim ever being to ren- 
der this spot the centre of her attractions, in- 
stead of seeking to fascinate an admiring throng 
in the splendid scenes of dissipation. ' 

Luxurious entertainments denominated 
symposia, were common in most Grecian cit- 
ies, as for instance, in Athens and Corinth. At 
these feasts, where was great excess in eating 
and drinking, these professional dancers were 
introduced to heighten the pleasure by the ex- 
ercise of their charms. How strikingly do the 
directions of St. Paul to the Corinthians indi- 
cate such a state of morals as would be a natural 
result of this indulgence in sensual pleasures. 
After enumerating many flagrant and abomi- 
nable vices, he adds, addressing those who had 
accepted the plan of salvation through a cruci- 
fied Saviour, *' And such were some of you ; but 
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye 
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
and by the Spirit of our G-od." Again he says, 
*' I have written unto you not to keep compar 
ny, if any man that is called a brother be a 
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a 
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner ; with 
such a one no not to eat." At the same time 
the universality of such practices is strikingly 



y Google 



YOUNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 97 

apparent from his words: "Yet not altogether 
with the fornicators of this world, or with the 
covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters ; for 
then must ye needs go out of the world." 

In Italy, as in Greece, dancing was used in 
religious worship, and also as an amusement ; 
still, the Romans, in the early period of their 
history, were distinguished for simple and in- 
dnstrioas habits; and like the Spartans, to 
excel in military glory seemed their highest 
ambition. The circumstances connected with 
the death of Lucretia show that chastity was 
regarded as a priceless ornament to the female, 
and that industry as well as chastity, was a 
marked trait in the character of this noble wom- 
aUj this being the virtue which excited the 
admiration of the wretch that wrought her ruin. 
On this occasion, at a late hour in the night, in- 
stead of being engaged in a scene of festive amuse- 
ment, she was found spinning with her maids. 

How debasing the influence of one who lives 
merely for the gratification of the passions; 
but how ennobling to devote one's self to the 
duties of life, to be the true woman, the light 
of that domain which she alone can render 
bright and happy. Thais the courtesan of 
earth's greatest conqueror, and Cornelia the 

6 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



98 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

mother of the Gracchi — ^how great the contrast 
in the acts which have given them a place on 
the historic page: the one for instigating the 
burning of Persepolis, the other for regarding 
her sons as her jewels, and training them for 
her country's service. 

As the power of Rome increased, and her 
sway extended beyond the limits of the Italian 
peninsula, a great change qjtme over the char- 
acter of her citizens. When the empire of 
Macedon yielded to her arms, and Egypt and 
Carthage became her tributaries, while the rich 
and populous countries of Asia were subservi- 
ent to her power, and the wealth of the East 
was poured into her treasury, then it was that 
this mighty people sunk under the influence of 
luxury and its attendant vices. The stejn, 
inflexible Boman, whom no danger could ter- 
rify, no power of arms overthrow, yielded to 
the soft embrace of pleasure. It is true, that 
Rome stood forth for centuries the proud mis- 
tress of the world, her sway extending from 
the Euphrates to the Atlantic, and from the 
deserts of Africa on the south to unknown 
regions on the north j but at length corruption 
reaches her vitals, and rapid is her decline. 
Her emperors take the lead in sensual indul- 



y Google 



YOUNa LADT OF PLEASURE. 99 

gence, and her senate are enslaved by the army ; 
while the strength of her armies are the mer* 
cenary barbarians of the north. By repeated 
invasions her power is shaken, till at length 
the Groths and Yandals triumph, and this 
mighty empire falls. 

During this downward course, the attentive 
reader of history cannot fail to discover that 
sensual gratification was the one great object, 
to which her inhabitants of all classes and con- 
ditions were devoted ; one feast following an- 
other in quick succession, so that revelry and 
excess seem the all-absorbing business of this 
pleasure-loving people. At these feasts music 
iand dancing contribute to the enjoyment, tend- 
ing to inflame the passions, and heighten the 
disposition to indulge in every kind of excess. 
Hence the sarcastic rebuke of the wise Cicero : 
"No sober man dances, except perchance a mad- 
man or a fool." He, it must be admitted, was 
one wise man: among hosts of madmen or fools. 

Previous to the time of Cicero so fearful 
had been the influence of bacchanalian orgies, 
or ceremonies performed in the worship of 
Bacchus, that by order of the Senate they had 
been forbidden. This act of government no 
doubt checked the prevalence of these orgies. 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



100 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

but revellings of some character continued, and 
dancing was still practised, as appears from this 
denunciation of Cicero. After a time, however, 
this kind of amusement went into disrepute, 
probably was superseded by gladiatorial com- 
bats, as in the time of Trajan it seems to have 
been laid aside, these combats at the same 
time drawing together spectators by thousands. 
After the abolition of gladiatorial combats, a 
kind of dancing was resumed. It was, how- 
ever, performed only by men, and had some- 
thing of the pantomime character. 

Dancing practised by both sexes was first 
introduced into France in the reign of Louis 
XIV., in the seventeenth century. It was the 
fashionable entertainment at court, and hence, 
among this pleasure-loving people, it soon be- 
came the favorite amusement of all classes, and 
on all occasions, public as well as private. 
Prom this time France, but especially Paris 
her grand emporium, has sent, and continues to 
send forth troops of dancing-masters, to prop- 
agate this art in other lands. In its perform- 
ance she, however, bears away the palm. A 
question which naturally arises is, whether this 
amusement has had any influence upon the 
morals of this nation. This of course it does 



y Google 



TOUNa IiADT OP PLEASURE. 101 

not seem our province to decide ; still, there can 
be no impropriety in inquiring what are the 
morals of this people. The testimony of one 
who has had mnch opportunity to become ac- 
quainted with the character of French society, 
shall fiimish the reply. **A virtuous woman 
here is the exception, not the rule, and one- 
third of the children are of uncertain parent- 
age."* We may therefore infer that this amuse- 
ment has not had a very purifying influence. 

Still it is true, that the people of this our 
highly favored land feel it necessary to import 
from France a set of teachers to form the man- 
ners of their youth, and to initiate them into 
graces that are to furnish their passport into 
fashionable society. Hence * * a swarm of needy 
adventurers, like the locusts of the Egyptian 
plague," infest our shores, stinting the growth 
of right principles,' blighting the buds of virtue, 
and tending, it would seem, to produce a moral 
desolation, instead of the rich harvest for which 
our fathers toiled. 

In my next I will speak of changes in our 
country which I myself have witnessed. 
Your affectionate friend. 

* Dr. Baird. 



y Google 



102 TOUNQ LADY OP PLIIASUBE. 



LETTER XI. 

MT DEAB FBIEND : 

Your letter contained many things qnite 
new to me, and of great interest. I had no 
idea that dancing was ever regarded by heathen 
people as Plato and Cicero looked upon it, or 
that its influence was ever thought so evil. I 
knew that Aspasia, while very much admired 
and sought after on account of her accomplish- 
ments, was still thought not to be very virtu- 
ous. I did not, however, know that she be- 
longed to a class of dancing-girls; nor did I 
know the name given to that class of females. 
This most certainly shows what their character 
was, and I do not wonder that Plato thought 
the profession *4ow and disgraceful." 

I have known the French to be distinguished 
for the practice of dancing, and at the same 
time not remarkable for virtue. I never thought, 
however, of putting these two facts together, or 
supposed there was any connection between 
them ; still, judging from what we know of the 
influence of this amusement as now practised, 
I see no reason why it may not be considered 
one cause of the prevalence of immorality. The 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 103 

French are very excitable, and their passions 
easily moved; dancing therefore may have a 
greater influence upon them than upon those 
of a more phlegmatic temperament; and this 
susceptibility of feeling may also account for 
their excelling in this accomplishment. 

From your letter, I have been led to see 
what must be one of the advantages resulting 
from the study of history. As human nature 
is everywhere the same, the same causes will 
be likely to produce the same effects ; and the 
history of one nation may therefore give lessons 
of practical wisdom to another. In perusing 
the annals of past ages, the rocks and quick- 
sands upon which others have been wrecked 
may thus, be discovered, and people may be 
led to avoid such a course as exposes to these 
dangers. 

I was struck with the view which you gave 
of the Roman empire, and the consequences 
which resulted from an enlargement of terri- 
tory, and an increase of wealth and power. I 
knew the history before, but I never saw the 
events in their philosophical relations, nor did I 
ever think that by ** the decline and fall" of this 
empire a voice of warning is given, to which 
modern nations would do well to take heed. 



y Google 



104 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBB. 

The reading of history is certainly very im- 
portant, and needs to be continued after one's 
school-days are over. When I think what a 
large field here lies open before me, I feel a 
kind of hopelessness in regard to the accom- 
plishment of my desires. Although J. studied 
history, both ancient and modem, at school, it 
hardly seems as if I knew any part of it thor- 
oughly. 

I delight in the long winter evenii^, when 
we can spend them in reading. My sister and 
myself have been going over D'Aubigne's His- 
tory of the Reformation again, and we have 
found it intensely interesting. I think the sec- 
ond reading of a book more pleasant than the 
first. It is like conversing with an old friend. 

Your letter recalled many of my historic 
associations, and RoUin came quite fresh before 
me. The contrast between the Dorians and 
lonians interested me much. I always had a 
great admiration of the Spartan character, and 
was quite delighted with the testimony of Miil- 
ler in regard to their superiority. The names 
of some of these noble women are impressed on 
my memory. How admirable the conduct of 
Archidamia, when she exclaims, ** Deliberate 
not, men of Sparta, where we are to fly, but 



y Google 



YOUNa LADT OF PLEASURE. 105 

what wjB are^ to do ;" and when, with her coun- 
try-women, she goes heartily to work in dig- 
ging a trench, by which the city is saved. 
Gratesiclea always impressed me as evincing 
a spirit more truly Christian than many who 
make a profession of faith, when, although in 
the deepest affliction, she says to her son, 
*'King of Lacedemon, let us dry our tears, 
that no person may see us weep or do any 
thing unworthy of Sparta; for this is in our 
power — events are in the hands of the gods." 

We see, in this part of Grecian history, an 
illustration of the benefit of self-denial, and of 
the habit of self-control. What a contrast be- 
tween Gratesiclea and Aspasia; the one im- 
pressing so pure an influence on the king of 
Liacedemon, the other so dark a stain on the 
man having greatest power in Athens. 

I was not aware that the character ascribed 
to the same god differed so much, and was so 
much in accordance with that of the people. 
It was in this way, I suppose, an excuse was 
sought for sin by lowering the character of the 
being they worshipped, and believing him like 
themselves. I wonder if people in a Christian 
land are not guilty of the same error. 

While thinking of the benefit of self-denial 
6* 

Digitized by V^OOQ"lC 



106 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

and earnest effort, I conld not help fancying 
that our pilgrim fathers were made better by 
this means. They had a great cross to take up 
in leaving their native land, and in exchanging 
the comforts of a refined and plentiful home for 
all the hardships of a life in the wilderness. 
And then, had they entered upon the prairies 
of the West instead of the rocky soil of New 
England, it is doubtful whether they would 
have had that strength of character which they 
impressed upon their children — that mighty 
energy by which obstacles seemingly insur- 
mountable were overcome, and a foundation 
laid for the enjoyment of privileges both civil 
and religious throughout our fair land. 

We have been reading in our circle the 
" History of New England" by Morse and Par- 
ish, and this has quite enkindled our admira- 
tion for our pilgrim fathers. Truly it was in 
the fear of Grod that they set up their banners. 
*' Prayer and pains through faith in Christ," 
explains the secret of their success ; and this 
must have been the watchword of many a Chris- 
tian hero, as well as of Eliot the devoted mis- 
sionary to the Indians. 

Much do I anticipate from your next letter. 
Your own MABIA 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP FLEASUBE. 107 



LETTER XII. 

Ab usual, your letter was a source of pleas- 
ure. I love to discover in my dear Maria an 
increasing degree of thought, and a disposition 
to exercise her reasoning powers in drawing 
lessors of practical instruction from what she 
reads and studies. 

I promised in this letter to say something 
of the changes which I have witnessed in our 
country. I have indeed been permitted to live 
in an age marked with great and soul-stirring 
evente — events which have put a new face upon 
the world; and- in this march of improvement, 
I think it may truly be said, that our new and 
rising nation has led the way. 

The nineteenth century will ever stand 
forth on the page of history, as a period re- 
markable for the achievements of human gen- 
ins. The much that has been accomplished 
for the convenience and comfort of man by 
the invention of labor-saving machines is truly 
wonderful, while the application of steam as a 
propelling agent has given an expedition that 
outruns all calculation. In all the departments 



y Google 



108 TOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

of labor, from the cultivation of the ground to 
the printing of books and the manufacture of 
the various fabrics for use or beauty, the la- 
borer may almost be said to stand still and see 
the work performed to his liking. Space too, 
in a measure, seems annihilated, as the majes* 
tic vessel skims over the sea, and the thunder- 
ing train flies through the land ; while, more 
wonderful still, the electric fluid transmit&mes- 
sages with the speed of .lightning. 

Our country meanwhile has been so en- 
larged in territory, that instead of the Missis- 
sippi being her western boundary, her sway 
now extends from ocean to ocean. At the 
same time, a golden tide has swept over our 
land, so that our young nation stands forth 
as distinguished for wealth as for extent and 
power. 

In contemplating this progress in temporal 
advantages, we may well inquire what has 
been done for man's nobler part, the soul. 
Here we perceive a progress no less wonder- 
ful. Under the influence of the free institu- 
tions established by our fathers, and secured to 
us by their self-denying energy and deter- 
mined resistance to the hand of tyranny, great 
are the privileges here enjoyed for intellectual 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEA8UBE. 109 

and moral improyement ; and the aspect of our 
conntiy, as we sorvey its assembled millions, 
gives evidence that a great work is here being 
carried on for man's higher nature, and that in 
this respect we are a people above all others 
most highly favored. 

Little did our pilgrim sires imagine the 
mighty results that would follow their strug- 
gling efforts for the glory of God and the good 
of their posterity, while, pleading for the bless- 
ing, they levelled the forest, and the church 
and the school-house went up together. The 
blessing was granted, even beyond the great- 
est measure of their faith. The prediction 
seems here to have been verified, "Many shall 
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increas- 
ed." Our young nation this day stands first 
on the globe for the general diffusion of intel- 
ligence, and for the means of improvement be- 
ing more fully within the reach of the masses 
of the. population than in any other. The Bi- 
ble, that charter of all our hopes, both for time 
and for eternity, is accessible to all. 

In no respect is progress more apparent 
than in the increase of advantages for the edu- 
cation of woman, and the change in public sen- 
timent in favor of her enjoying these advan- 



y Google 



110 YOUKG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

tages. Time was, when to read and write was 
deemed sufficient learning for her ; but now it 
is her privilege to pursue a thorough course of 
study. She may receive her diploma in the 
seminary and the college ; nor is the improve- 
ment of her mind found to interfere with her 
domestic duties, or to render her a being less 
worthy "of love. How elevated the condition 
of our sex in this highly favored land. How 
great the contrast between the station woman 
here occupies, and that of her sisters in those 
parts of the world still enveloped in the dark- 
ness of heathenism, under the influence of the 
feilse prophet, or even of a corrupt Christian- 
ity ; and how fully may she thus discover what 
she owes to the gospel of Christ, the religion 
of the Bible. It is this blessed influence that 
has elevated our country ; we are the people 
highly faVored above others, because the vol- 
ume of inspiration is open to all, and the her- 
alds of salvation proclaim its glorious truths 
through the length and breadth of our land. 

The period in which I have been permitted 
to live seems the tiawn of that glorious era 
which the beloved disciple in apocalyptic vis- 
ion saw, marked by the flight of the angel in 
the midst of heaven, having the everlasting 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OlP PLEASUBE. HI 

gospel to preach unto *' every nation and kin- 
dred and tongue and people." Near the close 
of the last century, Christians in the old world, 
moved by the Spirit of Grod, had united in 
great organizations for spreading abroad the 
blessings of salvation, and already were the 
missionaries of the cross proclaiming these glad 
tidings in Asia, Africa, and the isles of the 
sea. 

*' Westward the star of empire takes its 
way." Not only **the star of empire," but the 
**Star in the east" which the wise men saw, 
the harbinger of peace to guilty man, has pen- 
etrated the darkness of the **new world," and 
here sheds its heavenly light. The children 
of those who, for ** freedom to worship God," 
had left their pleasant homes in the old world 
and sought these far-oflF western wilds, having 
obtained this blessed privilege, constrained by 
love and desirous that all might know this glo- 
rious salvation, stand up together to extend 
the dominion of the Prince of peace. 

The commencement of the nineteenth cen- 
tury forms an epoch in the annals of Christian 
enterprise which brightens the page of his- 
tory ; ** it will be memorable to all posterity for 
the formation of institutions whose benevolent 



y Google 



119 TOUKa LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

and sablime design is to nnseal the fountain of 
life, and with joy to impart water from the 
wells of salvation to the millions who are ready 
to perish." In obedience to the command of 
their ascending Redeemer, nnder their respect- 
ive banners, the people of God have united in 
sending forth heralds of the cross, to publish 
the gospel of Christ, and to enable the ignorant 
and benighted to ''hear in their own tongues 
the wonderful works of God." 

The time is within my remembrance when 
those devoted young men at Williamstown, 
under the shadow of the hay-stack, consecrated ' 
themselves to the service of Christ in pagan 
lands, thus leading to the formation of the 
American Board of Foreign Missions and of 
the Baptist Missionary Board. How many 
have thus been enabled to preach Christ to 
the heathen, and how glorious the results that 
have attended their labors. Many are the 
combinations that have followed, and many 
the heralds of the cross that have left our 
shores, or have gone to the benighted on our 
own continent to publish the glad tidings of 
salvation. To me it has been most interesting 
to follow these missionaries of the cross to their 
far-off homes across the mighty deep, and to 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEA8UBE. 113 

become acquainted with their efforts to pour 
light into the darkened mind. A privil^e has 
it been to aid in the. promotion of this glorious 
work, and to receive the glad tidings of the 
triumphs of the gospel : that dark and benight- 
ed souls are enlightened from above, the idols 
cast away, and temples raised to the living 
Grod ; the Saviour embraced by thousands, and 
nations bom into the kingdom of the Redeem- 
er. '*What hath God wrought," even in the 
course of my short life ! The wilderness and 
the solitary place have been made glad, and 
the desert has rejoiced and blossomed as the 
rose. 

The Holy Spirit, moving upon the hearts 
of thousands, ''has shed abroad a Saviour's 
love." The voice of God has been heard; 
and many, when riches have been swept away, 
instead of seeking to dissipate their grief by 
sensual pleasure, have been seen wending their 
way to the place of prayer and humbly. bow- 
ing at the mercy-seat. Far and wide has this 
blessed influence extended — in the crowded 
marts of our commercial emporium, in cities, 
villages, hamlets, and among the scattered pop- 
ulation of our hills and valleys. Glorious have 
been the results, and still the work goes on. 



y Google 



114 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

m 

Moltitodes have come out from the world and 
declared themselves on the Lord's side. The 
great and the gay, the stem man and the ten« 
der and delicate woman, grey-haired sires and 
matrons, with the bright-eyed youth in the fall 
blooni of beauty; in short, many from all classes 
have entered into covenant with God. The 
devotees of fashion and of mammon have de- 
clared their willingness to renounce aU for 
Christ, and to consecrate themselves wholly to 
his service. 

May those who have taken the vows of Grod 
upon them depart from iniquity, being no more 
conformed to the world, but transformed by the 
influence of the Holy Spirit into the likeness of 
their Redeemer. As ** chosen pleasures reveal 
the state of the heart," we must infer that those 
who are really new creatures in Christ Jesus, 
cannot from choice engage in any business or 
pleasure which puts God out of the thoughts. 
Those whose hearts are imbued with the love 
of holiness can surely have no relish for that 
which is deadening to the spiritual life, which 
chills the aflfections,. and draws them away 
from the Saviour. Can those who have set 
their feqes heavenward be willing to use their 
wealth and their influence in helping onward 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 115 

the machinations of Satan ; and instead of pro- 
moting the salvation of the soul, to become 
instruments of its destruction ? Parents who 
have consecrated themselves to God, feeling 
their obligation to train up their children in 
his service, will surely beware of exposing 
these immortal beings to influences so soul- 
destroying as scenes of vain amusement. 

In the great and glorious work to be ac- 
complished by the instrumentality of the peo- 
ple of God, it is the privilege of woman to 
bear an important part, and much depends 
npon the stand now taken by her. If her 
heart is moved, and she is ready to take up the 
cross, renouncing all for Christ's sake, men 
will not be wanting to fill the ranks of Chris- 
tian heroes, going everywhere to preach the 
gospel. If she Is willing to give up fashion- 
able excess and selfish devotion to dress and 
display, scenes of frivolity and extravagance 
will fail for want, of participants. Let Chris- 
tian women deny themselves ; and instead of 
lavishing wealth and time to meet the de- 
mands of fashion, let them use all their tal- 
ents for God; -then will the silver and the 
gold be poured into the treasury of the Lord, 
and the messengers of the cross will go ev- 



y Google 



116 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

eiywhere publishing the glad news of salva- 
tion. 

That my dear Maria and her companions 
may have the spirit of Him who, "though rich, 
for our sakes became poor," is the prayer of 
their affectionate friend, 

M. STANLEY. 



y Google 



YOUNG liADY OF PLEASUBE. 117 



LETTER XIII. 

Mt visit to my dear teacher, how much I 
did enjoy it, though it was so short that the 
time was gone before we had begun to speak 
of half the things I wished. But the letter that 
you put into my hands when leaving was a 
rich treat on my way home. You would have 
been pleased could you have looked in on our 
reading circle while it was read. Our number 
has increased, and I believe it is from a desire 
to hear your letters. 

The view that you gave of the rising glory 
of our nation was listened to with deep inter- 
est. What mighty changes have been effected 
by the genius of man, and what, an influence 
has thus been exerted upon the condition of 
our sex. How much more time we can have 
for the improvement of the mind, than if we 
had to spin and weave our clothes ; and now 
the sewing-machine is greatly lessening the 
labor of making them. With privileges such 
as we now enjoy, how great are the obligations 
that rest upon us; and. the question naturally 
arises, whether the women of this age are as 



y Google 



118 YOUNG LADY OF^ PLE ASUBIL 

much superior to those of olden time as their 
advantages. I lately came across this remark, 
which, if true, is very sad: " In a solid, well- 
measured education, woman is not now as 
much in advance of her predecessors as her 
opportunities for advancement." The reason 
given for this failure was, that ** women live in 
the song and the dance, and melt away in a 
dreamy sentimentalism, when they ought to 
be intent on storing the mind with facts and 
principles, in becoming acquainted with stand- 
ard authors, and learning how to turn their 
attainments to good and wise purposes." , I 
desire to beware of every thing that shall hin- 
der my progress in what will fit me to be a 
good and useful woman, and the ladies of our 
circle all express the same feeling. • 

This is truly a wonderful age, and how 
great the privilege to be permitted to live ia 
such a period, and in a country so highly fa- 
vored ; but we should ever bear in mind that 
where much is given, much will be required. 

It seems to me I never before had much 
thought of the power of woman's influence. 
It is indeed a talent on the right improvement 
of which, and the manner in which it is exer- 
cised, amazing consequences depend ; for to her 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 119 

is committed the formation of character, and 
the setting in motion of those springs that 
move a nation. How true it is that the ap- 
probation of woman is necessary to render any 
thing popular ; that her smile or frown sways 
the multitude as the wind moves the mighty 
forest. How soon would the spirit of extrav- 
agance that so universally prevails be checked, 
if she would array herself against it ; and how 
sad that, instead of this, she seems intent upon 
being first in every kind of profusion. Chil- 
dren too are trained in the same habits of self- 
indulgence ; and judging from the richness of 
their attire, the sums expended for their dress 
and ornaments cannot be small. How much 
they think of what they wear, and how vain 
they are of fine clothes, is plain to every 
one. 

If we may learn lessons of practical wisdom 
from history, I think it would be well to take 
heed to the teachings suggested in tracing the 
rise and fall of the Roman empire. There is 
a great resemblance between our rising repub- 
lic and that of Rome, in increase of territory 
and advancement in wealth and power; and 
there may be a reasonable apprehension of a 
resemblance in a downward course ; especially 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

as the same disposition to extravagance and 
luxurious indulgence is now as plainly dis- 
cernible in the people of our land, as it was in 
the inhabitants of that empire during the period 
of her decline. Luxury and vice are a natu- 
ral result of yielding to the selfish passions, and 
the influence of Christianity can alone prevent 
this indulgence. I see nothing that can save 
our nation from this downward course, but a 
general diffusion of the gospel and the influences 
of the Holy Spirit. There is in this respect a 
great difference between the Roman empire 
and our own fair land ; for although, in the age 
of the apostles, Christ was preached in all the 
countries subject to the power of Rome, yet 
the condition of the great mass of the people 
must have been similar to what it is in pagan 
nations where missionaries are laboring at the 
present day — ^great ignorance and idolatrj^ still 
prevailing, though many have embraced the 
truth as it is in Jesus. Christians were not 
under the protection of the law, and in ten fear- 
ful persecutions the emperors sought to sweep 
them from the earth. . When Christianity was 
brought into favor by Constantine and Theo- 
dosius, still there was great ignorance of God's 
word, for copies of the Bible could only be 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 121 

multiplied by the slow process of traDscribing, 
the art of printing being then unknown. 

The only hope there can be for our country 
is, that people of all classes and conditions may 
be made acquainted with the word of God. 
Not only should missionaries be sent to every 
part of the home field, but the colporteur, with 
the precious treasures of divine truth, should 
find his way to every hamlet and benighted 
settlement in our land. How important too, 
that Christians live the religion they profess, 
not indulging in the extravagance, luxury, and 
frivolity that mark the age, but using the 
wealth so bountifully bestowed upon them, in 
extending the kingdom of the Redeemer. 

How desirable that, with an increase of 
wealth, we should increase in eflforts to give 
that gospel which has so exalted our nation to 
every creature under heaven. May the won- 
derftd inventions which have so annihilated 
space and brought the world together, be in- 
strumental in uniting the nations in the bonds 
of the gospel. How sad that the abundant 
means here enjoyed for doing good should be 
lavished upon ourselves, and used for the grat- 
ification of selfish passions. I think I never 
before realized so fiilly my obligation to con- 



y Google 



122 TOUNG LADT OF PIiEASUBE. 

secrate all I am and have to the service of the 
Bedeemer. May I be enabled to resist every 
temptation that would draw me away from this 
blessed Friend; and may I never bring dis- 
honor npon his glorious cause. 

Our reading circle is having a very happy 
influence. I think the members begin to feel 
that vain amusements and costly attire are not 
as necessary to their pleasure as they had imag- 
ined. They no longer attend dancing parties. 
Your aflFectionate 

MAKLL 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 123 



LETTER XIV. 

DEABMAEIA: 

The past three days have been to me so 
fall of enjoyment, that I must, before entering 
upon any other topic, give an expression to 
the feelings awakened by the wondrous scene 
which, for the first time, I have been permitted 
to behold. 

I have visited the cataract of Niagara, and 
my sonl has been ravished with that wonder- 
fal display of the majesty and power of God. 
I have drank in such sweet draughts of delight 
that the aching senses seemed incapable of re- 
ceiving more. 

I wonder not that so few attempt to describe 
that which so fully mocks the power of de- 
scription. It is not the height of the cataract 
that strikes the mind of the beholder: it is the 
mighty, foaming, tumbling mass of waters ever 
pressing onward and onward. Emotions of 
vastriess, immensity, force, and power fill the 
soul, and raise it above itself; while the beau- 
tifal, everywhere mingled with the sublime, 
comes in to its relief, and diffuses a pleasing 
serenity. The variety also is pleasing, as *he 



y Google 



124 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

view is taken from different points of obser- 
vation. Now one is filled with admiration at 
the torrent of crystals pouring down into the 
abyss below ; then the eye is delighted with the 
sheet of foam rolling over the mighty precipice, 
and again charmed as its majestic drapery of 
emerald hue falls gracefully from the overhang- 
injg height. Now you gaze upon the snow- 
white vapor towering to the heavens, and are 
thrilled with delight by the rainbow tints 
blended in the foaming mass. As the scene 
is surveyed from below, the mighty amphithe- 
atre rising before yon, encircling this world of 
waters, mocks the pride of human grandeur, 
and casts into the shade all the efforts of man's 
puny genius. A God, a God of majesty and 
might, is proclaimed by the foaming cataract, 
and reechoed by its thundering roar ; while the 
rainbow of promise speaks the God of the cov- 
enant, the covenant of mercy to a guilty world. 
As I stood before this scene of inimitable 
grandeur, I could not but exclaim. Come hith- 
er, unbeliever, and gaze at Niagara's swelling 
flood; look upward at this mountain torrent 
and say, **Hast thou an arm like God?'' Stand 
still, be silent, and adore. And you, trembling 
believer, as your soul is filled with a sense of 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 126 

tie majesty and power of the infinite Creator, 
know that this awfhl God is yours, your Father 
and your Friend. These are indeed but "parts 
of His ways ;" this wondrous display of his 
beauty and might but faintly shadows forth 
Him who is the perfection of all beauty, of all 
might, a faint emblem of Him in whom ''all ful- 
ness dwells." 

I could not, dear Maria, but give you some 
of my thoughts while surveying this wondrous 
scene, but you must see it yourself to realize 
its influence upon the mind. I think it does 
one's soul good. I feel aroused; and while 
more deeply impressed with a sense of my own 
littleness, the infinite power and love of a cov- 
enant God is delightfully realized, and I am 
assured that his strength shall be made perfect 
in my weakness. I hope that you too will soon 
have the privilege of enjoying the same scene. 

Although man's works are insignificant in 
coHjparison, yet the suspension bridge, one of 
the most wonderful of his inventions, strikes the 
beholder with amazement. 

And now, my dear Maria, I must tell you 
what a source of pleasure your letter was to 
me. I rejoice that you enter with so much in- 
terest into my suggestions, and seem to receive 



y Google 



126 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

even more benefit than I anticipate. It is pleas- 
ant to carry on this correspondence with you, 
and I sometimes think it will be more nsefiil to 
us both than if we could orally communicate 
our thoughts. 

It is a sad truth that many who profess to 
be travelling to the heavenly city, aUured by 
the great enemy of souls, stray into forbidden 
paths, the deviation from the narrow way seem- 
ing but slight, and the reasons suggested for 
this departure very plausible. Thus do they 
fall into sin like the pilgrim Tender-conscience, 
who is drawn out of his way^in the very sight 
of the cross, and allured into the house of Mirth, 
where he takes the opiates of Intemperance, 
dallies with Miss Wantonness, and goes to sleep 
in the arms of Miss Forgetfulness. He indeed 
escapes from the dwelling of Carnal Security, 
but many there are who do not awaken from 
their dream of pleasure until for ever too late. 

'*Flee youthful lusts," is. one divine pre- 
cept, and,J* Resist the devil," another ; it would 
therefore seem that different kinds of tempta- 
tion require to be differently met. When our 
passions and appetites are the instruments of 
the tempter, we may not listen, nor even look 
upon the objects forbidden. Thus Eve should 



y Google 



YOUNG LAPT OF PLEASURE. 127 

baye avoided the ''tree of knowledge" instead 
of gazing upon its froit; and when the serpent 
suggested that there wonld be an advantage in 
disobeying the divine command, she should 
have fled from the tempter, and deigned him 
no reply. 

Old Bnnyan says, ''The sonl may stand in 
battle against adversities, persecutions, crosses, 
and the like, but the pleasures of the flesh must 
be subdued by retreating from them." The 
command is, "Flee youthful lusts;" avoid them 
as a plague, run away from them. Any com- 
pany, employment, or amusement, that endan- 
gers the welfare of the soul, must be shunned ; 
nor should any heed be given to those who 
^ would, by ridicule, or by entreaty, weaken bur 
resolutions, and induce us to engage in that 
which we know to be a hinderance in our prog- 
ress to the heavenly city. How much better 
to be regarded as puritanical than to sin against 
Grod, and ruin our own souls. How watchful 
should the Christian be, how careful to study 
the directions of his heavenly Leader, and to 
pray for the teachings of the Holy Spirit. 

I took up the other day, and read with 
great interest, an old edition of what was called 
a third part of 'Tilgrim's Progress." It con- 



y Google 



128 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

tains a fand of useful thoughts, especially un- 
folding the varied temptations which allure 
from the path of duty, and against which there 
must be a constant guard. The strait and 
narrow way is clearly marked out, and also 
the by-paths in which many have perished. 
The names of the pilgrims are illustrative of 
their characters ; and the traits so clearly 
portrayed, help one to see the many ways 
in which she may go astray, aiding her to ob- 
tain a knowledge of her own heart, and of the 
sin that most easily besets her. Thus Yield- 
ing gives way to the allurements of Vanity 
Fair, and miserably perishes. Weary-of-the- 
world passes for a good pilgrim all the way to 
the river of Death ; but it is not love to God 
that leads him to give up the world, it is im- 
patience with the troubles of this life; and 
when he reaches the river he plunges in unbid- 
den, and sinks to rise no more. Zealous-mind 
is very forward and apparently very religious, 
but his dependence is on himself and not on 
his Saviour. In the river, seeking to buoy 
himself up with a bundle of reeds, or in other 
words resting upon his own righteousness, he 
too sinks in the deep waters, and fails to reach 
the Celestial City. On the other hand, Tender- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 129 

conscience, Seek-trnth, Convert, and Spiritoal- 
man, looking upward for aid, are borne across 
the dark waters and convoyed by angels to a 
world of glory. 

How tru^, that when we are mnch interest- 
ed in a subject, we often meet that which seems 
greatly to aid us in its investigation. I now 
scarce take up a book that I do not find some- 
thing reminding me of the duty of a Christian 
in regard to vain amusements. Last evening 
the chapter in course for my reading at the 
hour of retirement, was the fifth of Jamea. I 
was struck with the thought that the apostle, in 
answer to the inquiry, **Is any merry?" does 
not merely say, Let him sing, but, **Let him 
sing psalms." Rich men are condemned for 
having '* lived in pleasure on the earth," and 
for having **been wanton." How clearly the 
word of God directs us in the way to the new 
Jerusalem above. If diligently studied, how 
plain is the path of duty to the believer. 

The indisposition of the devotees of pleas- 
ure to engage in works of benevolence, is a trait 
plainly to be seen by every one. It is true 
indeed, that when a plan of doing good is con- 
nected with an amusement, or with some meth- 
od of spending time in accordance with the in- 
6* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



130 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

clinations, as for instance, if there is to be a 
fikir, there is a readiness to engage in the work; 
but ''visiting the fotherless and widows in their 
afiSiction," is not an employment in which we 
shall be likely to find pleasure-seekers engag- 
ed. Such persons are by no means ready to 
deny themselves in their dress and equipage, 
that they may have the privilege of sending 
the gospel to the ignorant and degraded; for 
self is the object that engages their attention. 
We should be surprised to meet an eminent 
Christian at a place of vain amusement, and we 
should be equally surprised to meet one of the 
devotees of pleasure in a missionary meeting, 
or to find her in a wretched hovel administer- 
ing to the wants of its degraded inmates. With 
a person of this class, money is always at hand 
to furnish luxurious entertainments, adorn the 
person, or gratify the taste for pleasure, *ut 
for benevolent purposes there is too commonly 
nothing to spare. 

A plea is often made for the introduction of 
dancing into parties of pleasure, that it pre- . 
vents trifling conversation and silly plays. 
There is undoubtedly some truth in this, but 
the question is, whether dancing is the best 
remedy for these acknowledged evils. In the 



y Google^ 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 181 

practice of this amusement there may not be 
much opportunity for conyersation, but I would 
inquire if foolish thoughts do not thus find their 
way into the mind, giving character to the in- 
tercourse for days succeeding. If therefore 
there is in this way an infusion of vain imagi- 
nations, which I think no one will deny, trifling 
conversation is not prevented, for from the 
abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, 
and an influence from these scenes of frivolity 
will be diffused abroad by no means beneficial 
to the community. 

In regard to the plays which dancing is 
thought to prevent, all I can say is, that be- 
tween these two methods of killing time there 
is only a choice of evils. The true remedy is, 
so to cultivate the mind that it shall be filled 
with useftil ideas ; for when persons who have 
no thoughts but trivial ones are together, to 
pass aWay the time they must either talk non- 
sense, play silly plays, or dance ; none of them 
good, though some childish plays are less inju- 
rious than foolish conversation or dancing. 
Among plays there is a choice, as some are 
much more innocent than others. A dance is 
often proposed because the company are dull ; 
a high compliment truly, as if one should say, 



y Google 



132 TOUNO LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

"Since we are minus brains, letns use ourheels." 
With a proper coltivation of mind, there cer- 
tainly woold be ideas and an ability to express 
them, and then these contrivances for passing 
away the time would be unnecessary. In addi- 
tion to conversation, music furnishes a delight- 
ful source of social enjoyment ; and as so much 
attention is now paid to this branch, it is usu- 
ally easy in any company to find those who 
can make the performance interesting. 

How any one of a high moral and intellec- 
tual character, such a person, for instance, as 
Mary Lyon, could endure a night at a ball or 
a fashionable party, I cannot well conceive ; I 
am sure it would require submission like that 
of a martyr. You, dear Maria, would, I think, 
find little enjoyment, for which I greatly rejoice. 
Your friend, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 138 



LETTER XV. 

Jinr DEAR MISS STANIiEY: 

Your letter, how mach I did enjoy it. In 
reading your description of Niagara, I could 
almost fancy myself on the spot, and the whole 
scene passing before my eyes. The ladies of 
our circle all unite with me in thanking you 
for introducing us to this wonderful exhibition 
of beauty and sublimity. 

And now I must tell you that your letter 
contained just what I wished you would say. 
It really seems as if you could almost read my 
thoughts. The very idea that dancing prevents 
foolish conversation and silly plays, was brought 
up in our reading circle last week by Miss Wil- 
eox,^ who, though she came in as a visitor, yet 
took an active part in our discussions. She 
said that, in parties where there is dancing, 
the time is spent more sensibly than- where it 
is given up to silly plays and talking non- 
sense. I have just called upon her, and read this , 
part of your letter. She appeared interested 
in your views, and not disposed to dispute 
them. I think she has been conscientious in 



y Google 



184 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

her approval of this amusement, though she 
said she knew that in this, as in other things, 
there are some results not very good. She 
seemed sensible that no one could be in the 
habit of attending fashionable parties without 
acquiring a love of dress. Her parents, she 
said, were not wealthy, and had really gone 
beyond their means in supplying her with such 
articles as would enable her to appear respect- 
ably in society, and yet she had often been 
mortified because her dress was so inferior to 
that of others. She had once expressed a dQ- 
sire to give a party herself, but her father haZl 
said that, though he would love to gratify her, 
yet he could not meet the expense, as it would 
cost one-fourth of all he could earn in a year. 
She conversed very sensibly on the foUy of tak- 
ing so much pains to find pleasure, and though 
very fond of lEashionable amusements, she seem- 
ed determined to deny herself these foolish 
indulgences, and attend more to the cultivation 
of her mind. She expressed herself much in- 
terested in our reading circle, and I think will 
soon become a member. 

How much good might be done with the 
money which is wasted in trying to please one's 
self. I cannot begin to think how much a fash-* 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 186 

ionable belle expends iu a year for dress and 
ornaments. "Nothing to wear," gave me more 
idea of it than I ever had before. If the money 
spent in extravagant entertainments, dress, and 
amusements, were devoted to sending mission- 
aries to the heathen, what a change in our 
world it would make. 

I was pleased with what you said of Pil- 
grim's Progress. It is a favorite book with me. 
I have read portions of it often, ever since I 
can remember, but I never saw a '* Third Part." 
Your remarks respecting **flee youthftd lusts," 
gave me some new ideas. It is very plain, I 
think, if we obey this direction of the apostle, 
we shall riot go to places of vain amusement, 
nor put ourselves in the way of receiving wrong 
thoughts. This reminds me that I have intended 
to ask your advice about attending the opera, 
theatre, and other fashionable places of resort. 
I have never been to them, but I should like 
to know the reasons why an attendance would 
be wrong. 

You have set me to thinking, and I feel 
more and more that if I am a true Christian, I 
cannot find pleasure in any thing that is not 
pleasing to God, that unfits me for his service, 
I realize more and more, that I need to watch 



,y Google 



136 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 

and pray continually, I am so easily drawn 
aside, and so prone to yield to temptation. 

You speak of music as a source of enjoy- 
ment in social circles. It is very delightful, 
and the influence is generally good, but some- 
times we seem compelled to hear songs that 
are low and foolish, the excuse for singing them 
being that the tune is pretty. 

I have often thought it strange that pious 
persons who are skilful performers on the piano, 
take so little interest in sacred music. Do you 

not recollect that at G some of the best 

musicians seldom joined in this part of family- 
worship ? The reason they gave was, that they 
did not know many psalm- tunes, and I thought 
they did not care to know them. In our church 
the singing is very poor, and it is remarked 
even of some who are professors of religion, 
that while they are the loudest at a party they 
are silent in the house of God. So you see 
there are some things still that trouble me, or 
that I cannot understand. I know we are all 
poor imperfect beings, and constantly liable to 
go astray, but it seems to me if the heart is 
right, that is, if we love holiness, we shall not 
choose what leads us further from God. 

Pray much for your matlta 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 187 



LETTER XVI. 

MY DEAR MABIA: 

I am always happy to receive your letters. 
I rejoice to be assured that you are increas- 
ingly desirous to find the right way. It is 
true that your inquiries demand some time for 
their investigation ; but as far as my other du- 
ties will permit, they shall receive attention, 
and I will reply according to the best of my 
ability. 

I am not surprised at your perplexity in 
regard to music. Christians do not, I am sure, 
make it the handmaid of religion as much as 
they might. I have often thought, how can 
those who, on earth, seem to have so little in- 
terest in this part of divine worship, unite for 
ever and ever in the melody of heaven. It 
seems indeed an inconsistency to profess to be 
animated by the same spirit as the sweet psalm- 
ist of Israel, and yet to be silent when his psalms 
are sung. It is true, there are those who have 
music in their hearts, who cannot join audibly 
with the great congregation in praising God. 
I refer not to these, but to those who have the 
ability, as is evident on other occasions. 



y Google 



138 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

Mnsic is a delightM sonrce of enjoyment ; 
and concerts, when the performances are of a 
chaste and elevating character, famish a sonrce 
of pleasure more unexceptionable than almost 
any other. The taste is thns refined, the soul 
refreshed, and fitted to grapple with the stern 
realities of life. We cannot, however, be too 
carefiil not to listen to strains by which foolish 
and impure thoughts are impressed upon the 
soul ; for nothing is more difficult than to erase 
impressions thus made. 

In regard to the opera, of which you wish 
me to write, I will now say something. The 
opera and the theatre are closely connected, 
both being exhibitions of the dramatic art, the 
dramas in the opeta being sung, while in the 
theatre they are spoken. The dramas are of 
two kinds, opera seria and opera huffa^ or the 
serious and the comic. Still, there are mono- 
logues as well as dialogues, and often lyrical 
performances, or addresses to the feelings. The 
singing in our country is generally in Italian. 
The music is of great artistic skill, so that to lov- 
ers of this art the opera presents great charms. 
I have, however, never supposed that it is re- 
garded with any more approbation by the relig- 
ious part of the community than the theatre. 



y Google 



YOUNG liADY OF PLEASUBE. 139 

The opera had its origin in Italy, in the 
latter part of the sixteenth centnry. Then it 
was entirely a mnsical performance. It has 
now somewhat of the pantomime character ; 
but the dancing was introdnced by the French. 
The design of the ballet-dance is, to "repre- 
sent by mimic movements and dances, actions, 
characters, sentiments, passions, and feelings.'' 
I presume, while this iis the design, yet to the 
spectators these exhibitions seem merely in- 
tended to show the great skill of the perform- 
ers, and thus excite admiration. The whirl- 
ing and spinning of the ballet-girlg, then pin- 
ning themselves to the floor by the big toe, 
shows that an amazing degree of application 
must have been exercised in acquiring the art, 
which might have been exerted for a better 
pnrpose. This performance is of an indelicate 
character ; for while standing on the toe, the 
other foot is stretched out so as to be as nearly 
parallel to the floor as possible.. The dress 
too of these dancing-girls, gives great expos- 
ure to the person ; and a wit once suggested 
that, to render a dull opera interesting, it was 
only necessary to lengthen the dances and 
shorten the petticoats. Those, therefore, who 
gaze at these performances, cannot *be persons 



y Google 



140 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUKE. 

of much delicacy. This ballet-dancing how- 
ever, in our country, is, I am told, practised at 
the theatre, and not at the opera. 

Since I began to look at this subject par- 
ticularly, I have seen it stated that in Phila- 
delphia the opera, during the past winter, has 
not been sustained, the attendance being so 
small. It was also suggested, and that too by 
a lover of the amusement, that one cause of this 
diminution of the audience was, probably, the 
immoral character of the performances. When 
we take into view the large attendance upon the 
daily prayer-meeting in that city, and the bless- 
ed work of grace there enjoyed, it is certainly 
no cause of surprise that the interest in this 
amusement should be lessened. Those who rel- 
ish the one, can have little delight in the other. 
A person with a heavenly mind, and a spirit 
of consecration to the service of the Redeemer, 
would not, I am sure, be an attendant upon the 
opera. That professors of religion are some- 
times found there, I know ; but I also know, that 
by this attendance they do not honor Christ, 
nor do they benefit their own souls. They 
must be influenced by a desire for selfish grat- 
ification, rather than a desire to please Godj 
for no one' who acts from Christian principle 



by Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 141 

will put himself in the way of sin, and do that 
voluntarily which will bring reproach upon his 
divine Redeemer. Carlyle's views give one a 
vivid idea of its character, and some of his 
reflections I will quote : 

* * When I think that music too is condemned 
to be mad, and to burn herself upon such a 
fdneral-pile„ your celestial opera-house grows 
dark and infernal to me. Behind its glitter 
stalks the shadow of eternal death. Through 
it too I look not up into the divine eye, as 
Eichter has it, but down into the bottomless 
eye-socket ; not upward towards God, heaven, 
and the home of truth, but too truly, down- 
ward, towards falsity, vanity, and the dwell- 
ing-place of everlasting despair." The opera, 
I am sure, must be considered, like the thea- 
tre, one of those amusements in which a Chris- 
tian should never indulge. 

At the present day, in our large cities, 
many snares are laid by which unsuspecting 
persons are drawn into scenes which they would 
by no means voluntarily witness. One of these 
is, the old device of calling things by wrong 
names. For instance, a concert is announced, 
and the stranger having a taste for fine music 
is there ; but he is disappointed. There is mu- 



y Google 



142 TOUNO LADY OP PLEABUBE. 

sic, indeed, but it is intermingled with scenes 
of a character very unlike what was an- 
nounced. 

The mnsenm, designed to display the won- 
ders of nature and of art, as such, might be 
visited with advantage ; bnt in this fashiona- 
ble resort of our great emporium, so many 
performances revolting to the feelings of seri- 
ous people are introduced, that a Christian 
hardly feels it consistent, or has any desire, 
especially in the evening, ever to be present. 

Theatrical entertainments designed to se- 
cure the patronage of the better portion of the 
community are not uncommon, the perform- 
ances of a character not very exceptionable, 
thus alluring persons of good morals to an at- 
tendance, and tempting them to form habits of 
dissipation. But I believe it is not too much 
to say of the theatre, that it is the master- 
piece of Satan's inventions. Under the pre- 
tence of reforming the world, the arch-deceiver 
has devised the most cunning contrivance to 
lead one to laugh at sin, an^ to become so 
familiar with scenes of vice, as to think little 
of violating the laws of the supreme Ruler of 
the universe. In exhibiting the various phases 
of human character, sentiments noble and ele- 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 148 

vated are now expressed, and actions com- 
manding respect and admiration delineated ; 
and then scenes of pollution and crime are so 
vividly portrayed, that a moral plague is in- 
fused into the soul. Music, poetry, and paint- 
ing combine their influence, and the fascination 
is so complete, that spectators seem powerless 
to escape the snare. 

The danger of tampering with this instru- 
ment of moral death was illustrated not long 
since. A clergyman who had sought to im- 
press the mind of his son with the evil of this 
species of amusement, thought to lead him to 
feel it more deeply by taking him once to the 
theatre. The result was, that the youth, cap- 
tivated by the scenes that evening exhibited, 
resisting his father's entreaties, gave himself 
up to an indulgence in this bewildering pleas- 
ure, and at last sunk to ruin. Go not then 
once, dear Maria, to the theatre ; repress the 
curiosity that might tempt you to do it, and 
ever exert your influence against this soul- 
destroying amusement. 

In arriving at conclusions respecting any 
course of action, the judgment of those whose 
knowledge has been gained by experience is 
always of much weight. In regard to the the- 



y Google 



144 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

atre, I can give you the decision of one deserv- 
ing our confidence. Dr. Cone, a minister of 
Christ distinguished for his talents and piety, 
when a young man struggling to obtain an 
education, and at the same time to sustain a 
dependent mother and sister, was induced by 
the pecuniary emolument, for some years to be 
an actor on the stage. As the result of his 
experience, he declares that ''this profession, 
more than any other, is calculated to stifle 
reflection and banish thought." 

Groethe says, **The drama presupposes the 
existence of an idle multitude." * What a char- 
acter is thus given of those Who find their 
pleasure in frequenting theatrical exhibitions. 
Again he says, ''This art employs the rest, 
but spoils them. Without any conscience, the 
player will lay hold of whatever either art or 
life presents to him, and use it for his fugitive 
objects, and indeed with no small profit; but 
the painter who would wish in return to ex- 
tract advantage from the theatre, will con- 
stantly find himself a loser by it, and so also 
in the like case will the musician." He com- 
pares the arts to a family of sisters, of whom 
"the greater part were inclined to good econ- 
omy; but one was light-headed, and desirous 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 145 

to appropriate and squander the whole goods 
and chattels of the household. The theatre, 
this wasteful sister, has an ambiguous origin, 
which in no case, as art or trade or amuse- 
ment, it can wholly conceal." 

Plato says, ''Plays raise the passions and 
pervert the use of them, and of consequence 
are dangerous to morality;" while Aristotle 
insists that '' the seeing of plays and comedies 
should be forbidden to young people, until age 
and discipline have made them proof against 
debauchery." 

Turning to the Romans, we find Tacitus 
and Ovid having the same estimation of this 
amusement: Tacitus accounting for the virtue 
of the German women by their having no play- 
houses to attend, and Ovid advising the em- 
peror Augustus **to suppress theatrical amuse- 
ments as a grand source of moral corruption." 

Even the infidel Rosseau asks, ''Where 
would be the prudent mother, who would dare 
to carry her daughter to this dangerous school?" 
while Archbishop Tillotson calls the play-house 
** the deviFs chapel, a nursury of licentiousness 
and vice." 

Dr. Johnson speaks of "irreligion and licen- 
tiousness" being thus "taught openly at the 

7 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



146 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

public charge ;" and President Dwight aflfirms 
that " from the stage men are directly prepared 
to go to the brothel." 

Thus you perceive, dear Maria, how hea- 
thens and Christians unite in condemning this 
method of seeking pleasure. 

The drama is, as you know, of two kinds, 
tragedy and comedy, very unlike in character, 
and yet both having an influence, when vividly 
portrayed with theatric scenery, altogether un- 
desirable. In tragedy, soul-stirring events and 
scenes of suffering are brought before the au- 
dience with such seeming reality, that the pas- 
sions are excited to the highest pitch of inten- 
sity; then there is naturally an effort to smother 
the feelings, or to resist the sympathetic emo- 
tions, and the result is that, familiar with scenes 
of pretended grief, the heart becomes hardened 
and insensible to real woe. Thus the passive 
habit of pity is Weakened by repetition, while 
the active habit of relieving distress is net 
formed, feelings of benevolence not being 
brought into exercise. In this way the most 
unexceptionable plays become decidedly inju- 
rious to the character. 

In comedy, the scenes brought beforfe the 
spectator are decidedly the reverse. Sport or 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 147 

ftin is the object, and any thing is the subject 
that can be thrown into a ridiculous light. It 
may be the faults and follies of mankind, or 
virtue and religion — any thing by which a 
laugh may be produced. l>io true ideas of ex- 
cellence are thus obtained, but a false stand- 
ard of character is presented to the young. 
Honest labor is so associated with degradation 
as to appear contemptible ; religion, repre- 
sented under the garb of hypocrisy or cant, is^ 
despised, while pride is made to seem noble in 
its bearing; and the flaunting, gay coquette, 
successful in her plots, and noted for the many 
heart-aches she has caused, becomes the ad- 
mired of all admirers. Thus no true estimate 
of character is formed, virtues and vices being 
so confounded, that one is often mistaken for 
the other. 

If any one vice is more glaringly exhibited 
than any other, it is licentiousness. Scenes 
suggesting impure thoughts are so often por- 
trayed on the stage, and language oflFensive to 
delicacy rendered so familiar, that the Soul, 
becomes tainted, and the imagination filled 
with vicious imagery. Here I must give you 
a quotation containing the views of one of the 
wisest and best of men. It is from Dr. With- 



y Google 



148 TOUXG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

erspoon, one of tl^e signers of the Declaration 
of Independence, and president of Princeton 
College. 

''Where can plays be fonnd that are free 
from impnrity, either directly or by allnsion 
and doable meaning ? It is amazing to think 
that women who pretend to decency and repu- 
tation, whose brightest ornament ought to be 
modesty, should continue to abet by their pres- 
ence so much unchastity as is to«be found in 
the theatre. How few plays are acted which 
a modest woman can see consistently with de- 
cency. No woman of reputation, much less pf 
piety, who has been ten times in a play-house, 
durst repeat in company all she has heard 
there. With what consistency they return to 
the same school of lewdness, they themselves 
best know." 

As thoughts lead to deeds, it is not sur- 
prising that those who frequent this place of 
amusement should easily yield to temptation, 
and thus lead a life of infamy and shame. In- 
deed, the immorality of those who attend the 
theatre is notorious ; people expect to find 
there robbers and pickpockets, the profane 
and unclean. Some who are lovers of the dra- 
matic art refrain from an attendance on this 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. U9 

accouiit. They have an aversion to the com- 
pany in which they would find themselves. 

And now, my dear Maria, I think I have 
said enough to give you and your compan- 
ions a true idea of these places of amusement, 
and I am sure you would be very unwilling to 
find your way to one of these abodes of moral 
death. 

Your friend, 

M. STAMiEY. 



y Google 



150 YOUNO LADY OF PLEABUBE. 



LETTER XVII. 

Most heartily, my dear Miss Stanley, would • 
I thank yon for your letter, and in this my 
companions all nnite. If I only do as well as 
I know, I am sure I shall not stray very far 
from the right, with such a friend to guide me. 
The ladies of our circle all came to the conclu- 
sion that, if ever so strongly urged, they would 
not go once to the theatre. 

What a striking description is that of 
Goethe — ^the dramatic art a good-for-nothing 
sister that pilfers without paying, and play- 
actors a very insignificant set of beings. 

I am fond of reading dialogues, and some- 
times, when listening to a fine drama of Shak- 
speare, I have felt disposed to ask, why seeing 
it acted would be any more improper than 
reading it. The reason now seems clear to 
me, and there is, I suppose, no probability that 
the theatre will ever be any better than it is. 
I had no idea, however, that plays which are 
acted there are as -bad as Dr. Witherspoon 
says ; and I was surprised to find such a uni- 
versal condemnation of this amusement both 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 161 

by heathens and Christians, although I never 
thonglit that the best class of people went to 
the theatre, or that a theatre-going young man 
^vras as worthy of confidence as one that stood 
aloof from such scenes of dissipation. 

It cannot certainly be safe to put one's self 
^vrhere the mind will be likely to be filled with 
corrupt thoughts, especially when we take into 
view what a strong hold any thing has which 
is received when we are greatly excited. I 
remember Kames says that theatrical repre- 
sentations, being addressed both to the eye and 
ear, make a more indelible impression than 
other exhibitions of the fine arts. I do not 
.suppose that I have any idea how fascinating 
this amusement is, nor how hard it would be 
to stay away if one had acquired the habit of 
attendance. How any one who desires purity 
of mind, and delights in communion with Grod, 
can enjoy being at the theatre, I do not under- 
stand. 

This makes me think of a question I want 
to ask you. Hannah More was an eminent 
Christian, and yet she attended the theatre ; and 
not only did this, but she» wrote dramas which 
were acted upon the stage. How she could 
delight in this amusement is what appears to 



y Google 



162 TOTJNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 

me very strange. Garrick the great actor seems 
to have been her particular friend. 

Another question please answer. In school 
exhibitions dialogues are acted, and sometimes 
scenes are represented. Do you think this 
wrong? Whati d^ 7^^ think of tableaux and 
charades? I wish you were here to answer 
me. 

Your 

MARTA. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 153 



LETTER XVIII. 

I OFTEN wish with you, my dear Maria, that 
we could interchange our thoughts orally in- 
stead of writing them ; but as this cannot be, we 
must make the best use we can of the pen, and 
be thankful for this privilege. 

First I will answer your inquiry about 
Hannah More, or settle the diflficulty that seems 
to have arisen in your mind in regard to her 
attendance upon the theatre. In doing this, 
it will be necessary to refer to some circum- 
stances iu her early history. Hannah More 
was the daughter of a clergyman, and of course 
belonged to that class to whom education 
rather thaft nobility or wealth gave superi- 
ority. 

She was one of five sisters, all of whom 
stood high in their intellectual attainments, and 
were successful as teachers. Early in life little 
Hannah delighted them by her uncommon gen- 
ius, but in her subsequent career she outshone 
them all. While yet a •youth she published 
some works whicJti were favorably received, and 
noticed by persons of eminence in the literary 

7* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



164 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

world. Soon after this she visited London, and 
here her reputation had preceded her, giving 
her an entrance into a circle of as brilliant 
minds as have at any period ever graced so- 
ciety with their genius, wit, and learning. 
Here she was not only brought into the com- 
pany of persons with whom she felt it a privi- 
lege and a pleasure to be associated, but she 
was also introduced to amusements for which 
she had no taste, and which her moral sense 
condemned. Dancing and cards were indeed 
banished from the '*Blue Stocking Club," the 
name given to the social gatherings of those 
persons so distinguished for their genius and 
wit, but attendance at the theatre was common. 
Grarrick, one of this circle, was really a prince 
among actors ; and as Miss More had written 
some dramas which were thought worthy of the 
stage, it is not strange that she should have 
accompanied her friends to this place of fash- 
ionable resort. 

But under the influence of all these circum- 
stances, becoming convinced that the theatre 
was not the place for a Christian, she decided 
that she wofild attend no more. Her decision 
being made, she acted in accordance with it,^ 
and though strongly importuned to resume her 

M 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



TOUNa LADY OP PLEASURE. 166 

attendance, she could not be prevailed upon to 
violate her conscience. 

Nothing could induce her any longer to 
encourage what she knew to be evil in its in- 
fluence, and inconsistent for a Christian to coun- 
tenance by her presence. During her long life 
she attended the theatre no more. Consider 
her youth, the circle in which she moved, the 
example of older Christians, the distinction she 
might gain by writing for the stage, and you 
can forna some idea of the strength of principle 
which influenced her conduct. I know of noth- 
ing more to the point in condemnation of the 
theatre, than the course pursued by Hannah 
More, a woman eminent not only for her piety, 
but for strength of intellect, and who has done 
as much for the elevation of her sex as any one 
perhaps that could be named, of either ancient 
or modern times. 

You ask concerning the propriety of dia- 
logues in school exhibitions. I suppose there is 
nothing wrong in speaking a good dialogue, any 
more than in reading one. The harm is not in 
the form, but in the matter ; and this perhaps is 
the reason why many imagine the" stage might 
be made the means of promoting good morals. 
That it does not have this influence we know, 



y Google 



166 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

and our knowledge of hmnan nature makes it 
plain that there is no reason for believing it 
ever will. But in regard to dialogues in schools, 
under the direction of judicious teachers, there 
' is no probability that any thing really improp- 
er will be permitted. The object is improve- 
ment a^ well as amusement, and of course any 
thing calculated to exert a bad influence will 
be carefully excluded. Caution should be ex- 
ercised to avoid so great a degree of excite- 
ment as to draw off the attention from other 
school duties, and give a taste for theatrical 
entertainments. 

The drama is a very pleasant species of 
composition, as instead of the scene being de- 
scribed by an observer, the actors themselves 
relate the story in their own language. It is a 
very difficult kind of composition to write, as 
great knowledge of human nature is necessary, 
to enable one to give the thoughts and feel- 
ings of various characters in different condi- 
tions of life. A dialogue must be true to na- 
ture in the language, as well as in the opinions . 
and sentiments. This method of writing is not 
wrong, and we find examples of it in Scripture, 
as the book of Job and tjie Song of Solomon. 

Plato's dialogues have stood the test of 



3itg5d by Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 167 

ages, and are still admired. In these dialogues 
Plato gives his own thoughts and those of Soc- 
rates, and probably a true representation of 
scenes in Athens more than two thousand jeOts 
ago. 

Shakspeare is the most distinguished of all 
dramatic writers — distinguished both for his 
genius and knowledge of human nature, as well 
as for the force and beauty with which he 
t^lothes his thoughts. 

To repeat what is important and striking, 
in the manner in which it was first expressed, 
cannot be wrong; and conversations trbe to 
nature may be very useful. Fables, which of 
course are not literally true, are yet the means 
of conveying much moral instruction, and our 
Saviour, we know, taught much by parables. 

In regard to tableaux and charades, I see 
no objection to them. It is certainly a very 
innocent amusement to act the part of different 
characters, and little children early begin to do 
it, by playing keep-house, or come-to-see-you, 
and in a great variety of other ways. One 
may sit for a flower-girl, or an old woman ; she 
may act the- part of a school-teacher or a pupil, 
of a mother or a chijd, of old' queen Bess or 
Pocahontas, without any impropriety. Still, 



y Google 



158 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

there is danger, without a nice sense of propri- 
ety, of carrying such things too far, and of 
making them too much of a farce. There are 
characters that it would not be well to assume 
in play. 

A change of employment is a yery good' 
means of restoring our energies, and of giving 
rest to either body or mind. As by altering 
the direction in machinery the friction comes 
not so entirely on the same parts, so by reliev-* 
ing the powers, either mental or bodily, and 
giving them a respite, they seem to become 
stronger and more vigorous. Thus the school- 
girl, after hard study during the day, may find 
a pleasant relaxation in assisting her moth- 
er in domestic duties. Those who cannot have 
this privilege may cultivate flowers, or walk in 
the fields, or, with hearts full of benevolence, 
may visit the poor and relieve their wretched- 
ness. Our sex are highly favored by their em- 
ployments being of so varied a character. If 
the weather is unsuitable for exercise in the 
open air, there are numerous methods of re- 
freshing both body and mind without this ex- 
posure, either by play or by work. A pleas- 
ant chat while plying the needle is a delightM 
recreation, and at the same time may be highly 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEABURE. 169 

profitable. Then, again, when wearied with 
the performance of household labor, or with the 
use of the needle, how pleasant to peruse an 
interesting book, and thus refresh the worn-out 
body. Eeading, like music, can be a social 
enjoyment, and either may diffuse a charm 
through the home circle without interfering 
with its necessary avocations. Cowper, in his 
description of a winter evening, beautifully 
enumerates the social pleasures that may be 
enjoyed in this quiet season, and shows how 
delightfully the time may pass without resort- 
ing to any of the tricks that idleness has con- 
trived, . 

<< To fiU the Toid of an unfamiahed brain, 
To palliate dulness, and give old time a shove." 

How true indeed, that in all the varied as- 
semblages seeking by some trifling amusement 
to charm away the livelong night, though there 
may be much mirth, yet not a countenance is 
seen to express a joy as refined and sincere as 
would light up the face in a home .circle like 
the one the poet thus beautifully describes : 

"Now stir the fire and close the shutters fast, 
Let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round ; 
Thus let us welcome peaceful evening in ; 
And gathering, at short notice, in one group 
The family dispersed, thus pass the hours 
In social converse and instructive ease ; 



y Google. 



160 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

FireBide enjoyments, hame-bom bappiness. 

While here the needle plies its busy task, 

The poet*s or historian's page, by one 

Made vocal for the amnsement of the rest 

The sfMightly lyre, whoee treasure of sweet sounds 

The tonch from many a trembling chord shakes ont 

With the dear Toioe symphonions, yet distinct 

Disoonzse ensues, not trivial, yet not dull. 

Nor snch as with a frown forbids the play 

Of fancy or prescribes the sound of mirth. 

Added to these are themes of graver tone, 

Exciting oft our gratitude and love ; 

Fruits of omnipotent, eternal love, 

Which we retrace with memory's pointing wand." 

At the close of such an evening, in which has 
been^ enjoyed the feast of reason and the flow 
of soul, peacefully, and at a seasonable hour, 
all retire to rest ; not however, we will sup- 
pose, until 

"The sire turns o'er, wi' patriarchal grace. 
The big Ha-Bible, ance his father's pride." 

A song of praise is poured forth from full 
hearts, and 

** Then kneeling down, to heaven's eternal King 
The saint, the father, and the husband prays." 

Exercise of the body is highly necessary 
for health as well as for pleasure, and there 
are various methods by which it can be taken 
within doors, when it is imprudent to go out ; 
but the open air is most healthftd and invig- 
orating. The ladies of our country are mor^' 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 161 

sickly than foreigners, owing undoubtedly, in 
part, to their sedentary habits, or aversion to 
out-of-door exercise. 

We must ever bear in mind that our recre- 
ations are to fit us for the better performance 
of duty, whether it be labor of the body or of 
the mind, and that we must use them as a 
means to prepare for the attainment of a higher 
end. In order to answer the desired purpose, 
they must be agreeable, or they will not be 
refreshing ; but they must not be of a charac- 
ter so exciting as to use up the strength, and 
unfit for the business we are under obligation 
to perform. In order to invigorate the sys- 
tem, there must be no interference with the 
laws of nature. Night is the time for rest and 
repose ; it is therefore a gf eat injury to both 
body and mind* to take this period for recrea- 
tion. The custom of commencing evening par- 
ties at nine or ten o'clock, and of having the 
refi^eshments in the dead of night, is contrary 
to common-sense, though in accordance with 
the dictates of fashion. Should we ask which 
it is our wisdom and duty to obey, we might 
easily obtain the right answer; and yet how 
few have the moral courage to act in conformity 
"• with what they know to be right, if by so doing 



y Google 



162 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

they incur the frown of this potent mistress. 
The fact that fashion claims night as the time 
for her amusements is a sufficient reason, if 
there were no other, why one should not indulge 
in such pleasures. It is absurd to continue 
recreations beyond a suitable period ; and we 
can know from our own feelings when they 
should cease, as easily as we can know when 
we have eaten what is necessary to satisfy 
hunger. The body will complain when over- 
tasked or overloaded, and beings endowed 
with reason can understand. these intimations. 
Whenever an amusement so excites the feel- 
ings as to overpower the reason, it is danger- 
ous. As this is true of dancing and theatrical 
entertainments, you can clearly see that the 
only safety is in entirely abstaining from them. 
With much esteem, yours, 

M. STANLEY- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 168 



LETTER XIX. 

MY DEAE MESS STANLEY : 

Your letters are so full of interest that I 
find myself in eager anticipation of another as 
soon as I have read the one just received. 
Then I always want to see you, as I think of 
so many things I would like to say ; or ques- 
tions are suggested that I am in a hurry to 
have answered. 

I am delighted with your account of Han- 
nah More. I always thought highly of her, but 
how much is my admiration of her character 
increased, by the firmness and decision she 
manifested in adhering to what she believed 
her duty. I hope I shall be enabled to imi- 
tate her example, and ever hold fast to the 
right, whatever may be the consequences. It 
is, however, not an easy thing to say no, when 
strongly urged to engage in what is agreeable* 
to one's taste, even though it is known to be 
wrong. How much moral courage is required, 
when one must refuse compliance with the 
wishes of those whom she loves. Then it is 
hard to bear ridicule, and to be accused of 
thinking yourself better than others — so very 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



164 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 

pious as not to be willing to associate with 
them. I presume Hannah More was thus spo- 
ken of; but she seems to have been so intent 
on doing what she believed to be her duty^ as 
not to be moved by the frowns or flatteries of 
the world. 

I know that decision is a great safeguard, 
for the firm and unwavering have much less 
trouble than thp undecided and yielding. I 
have often seen this in school; and I shall 
never forget Miss Jay. Those who were plot- 
ting mischief never tried to draw her into their 
schemes, for they were sure she would do noth- 
ing but what she knew to be right ; while her 
cousin, Fannie Proctor, was often getting into 
difficulty by listening to her disorderly com- 
panions, not daring to show her disapproba- 
tion of the pranks they were playing to dis- 
turb those who wished to study. 

We have all become so much interested in • 
Hannah More, that we intend to read her life. 
Biography seems to me a very useful kind of 
reading ; for we can thus associate with the very 
best of people, as for the time we do really 
have intercourse with them, and their society 
must have a tendency to improve the charac- 
ter. Then, for the same reason, it cannot be 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 106 

well to dwell on the lives of those who have 
been distinguished for evil deeds; for I am 
sure we cannot associate with such persons 
without becoming contaminated, as wrong 
thoughts will thus enter the mind, and it is 
not easy to put them out, and to become 
free from their influence. If we "hate vain 
thoughts," I do not think we can be willing to 
receive them. 
• In regard to Shakspeare, whom you men- 
tion as the most distinguished dramatic poet, 
do yoTi approve of reading his plays ? A gen- 
tleman of my acquaintance told me the other 
day that he thought the reading of Shakspeare 
essential to a polite education. Knowing that 
his dramas are in use on the stage, I could not 
help feeling doubtful whether you would think 
as he did ; and so, my dear Miss Stanley, as 
you are my mentor, I come to you for advice. 
We were all pleased with what you said in 
regard to the interference of fashionable amuse- 
ments with the hours of rest and repose. It 
seems very foolish to go to a party at the very 
time we should go to our beds, and to punish 
ourselves by keeping awake all night, that we 
may be amused. 

Your own maeta. 



y Google 



166 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER XX. 

MYDEABMAIULA: 

Yours is just received. I am glad to find 
an increase of thought, as well as an increas- 
ing diffidence of yourself. The more we be- 
come acquainted with ourselves, and the more 
earnest to find the path of duty, the more Mce 
shall feel our need of divine assistance and di- 
rection. ** Guide me, thou great Jehovah,'' 
is the language of the believer at every step 
of his pilgrimage through this wilderness to 
the celestial city ; yet while he follows Jesus, 
and looks to him for strength and guidance, ~ 
communion with his fellow-travellers is one of 
his great sources of enjoyment. Graciously 
has our divine Leader made it the duty of 
Christians to help one another in the heavenly 
way, *' bearing each other's burdens." But 
there is a greater nearness and a more tender 
connection between some Christians than oth- 
ers. Timothy and Titus are addressed by Paul 
as his own sons in the faith, and you are my 
dear child in the bonds of the gospel. I pray 
that *' in all things" you may be **an example 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 167 

to believers," and that thus glory may redound 
to our divine Immanuel. 

I rejoice that you feel so deeply the impor- 
tance of keeping wrong thoughts out of the 
mind. If it be so diflScult to remove the im- 
pression which they make, how carefully should 
we avoid whatever has a tendency thus to tar- 
nish the soul. 

Ton request my opinion in regard to the 
reading of Shakspeare, which I will give you 
with pleasure. Shakspeare is justly consid- 
ered the prince of dramatic poets; it would 
. seem therefore, that persons of education 
should be acquainted with his merits, and have 
a relish for his beauties. Still it should be 
borne in mind that the design of the author is 
to exhibit human nature as it is, or men as 
they have been known to act their part on' 
life's great stage. He therefore introduces you 
not only to the wise and noble, the heroes of 
great and soul-stirring scenes, he also causes 
those to pass before you who are noted for folly, 
vide, and crime. In some of his dramas we 
find portrayed the fearful results of yielding to 
the baser passions; in others, a lifelike exhi- 
bition of historic events by which the world 
hd/a been revolutionized. 



yGocygle 



168 TOUNQ LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

A criticism of this great poet that I have 
lately read is so mach in point, that I must 
give you a little quotation from it. 

**Shakspeare strikes upon the tomb of 
ages ; buried monarchs start to life, and fol- 
lowed by their trains, come forth to show us 
what they were, and tell us how they lived. 
By his magic key are laid open one after an- 
other the most secret recesses of the human 
heart, and one sees the very springs which 
have set in motion the machinery of revolu- 
tions, the grand passions that have filled the 
world with action." 

Again, the same author says, ''There is 
much to call into exercise the worst passions 
of human nature, to tarnish purity of mind, 
and to beget a kind of profane familiarity with 
things of high and sacred import." 

You perceive therefore, that while there is 
such a diflference in the moral influence of dif- 
ferent works of this great man, much attention 
should be exercised .in making selections for 
your reading. This is especially importaftt, 
as scenes and characters are described with 
such glowing imagery and lifelike proportions, 
that the impressions made are deep and last- 
ing. The beauties of Shakspeare, however. 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 169 

are so marked, that there is little difficulty in 
selectmg what to read, and there is much that 
will repay you for a frequent perusal. 

The observation of your friend respecting 
the reading of this poet, I could not but com- 
pare with a direction I once received from a 
venerated teacher.* He was giving his pupils 
instruction respecting the books they should 
read; and after enumerating many authors, 
with their merits and defects, he mentioned 
Shakspeare. Some parts, he said, were pol- 
luting to the mind, while others were full of 
heauty and truth. I recollect that he spoke 
with caution, as if conscious of great responsi- 
bility, and fearftil of exerting a wrong influence 
upon his youthful charge ; then hesitating a 
moment, he concluded by saying, **You need 
never to be ashamed to say you have not read 
Shakspeare." 

You perhaps smile at this, and think my 
advice is not quite in accordance with that 
which I have quoted. I am aware of this, but 
it seems to me that the good man was a little 
more cautious than was necessary. 
Your friend, 

M. STANLEY. 

* Bey. Joseph Emerson. 
8 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



170 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER XXI. 

MY PEAB HIB8 STANLEY: 

Very much do I thank you for writing me 
80 fdllj in regard to the reading of Shakspeare. 
I anticipate much pleasure in perusing his fine 
thoughts. 

I was pleased with the reference to your 
old teacher Mr. Emerson. I think he was 
afraid of giving, wrong advice, and that if he 
erred, he intended it should be on the safe 
side. You have before spoken of him in such 
a manner as to lead me to feel quite a venera- 
tion for him. Misses Grant and Lyon were 
his pupils, I believe. I am sure he must have 
been a good man, and eminently useful. 
Though dead, he still lives in those whom he 
trained up to teach others, and they again in 
those whom they have taught. I think I have 
heard you say that if you have been useful as 
a teacher, you owe it more to Mr. Enterson 
than to any one else ; and who can form an 
idea of the good that has been and still is ac- 
complished by the Mount Holyoke Seminary, 
the institution brought into existence by Miss 
Lyon's efforts and prayers, and upon which 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 171 

she impressed her wise and holy influence? 
What multitudes, there brought into the king- 
dom of the Bedeemer, have gone forth to dif- 
fuse light not only in our own country, but in^ 
distant heathen lands. It seems as though 
we might say that the influence of a faithful 
teacher would never die. 

I remember you used to say that teaching 
is the profession of woman ; that tlie great busi- 
ness of her life is to educate others. I should 
not think this a very common opinion, though 
the more attention I have given to it, the more 
I am convinced of its truth. If young ladies 
were impressed with this idea, I am sure they 
would be more sensible of the importance of 
qualifying themselves for the office. To study 
his profession is thought necessary for a man ; 
and why is it not equally necessary for a woman? 

I think Mr. Emerson first gave you this 
idea of woman's special business, and the 
importance of acquiring such an education as 
would prepare her for the great work of train- 
ing other minds. He led you to feel that not 
only the intellect, but the heart must be culti- 
vated, and such a character formed as would 
fit one to give lessons of practical wisdom, and 
impress the young with right principles of ac^ 



y Google 



172 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

tion. I presume, therefore, it was to Mr. Em- 
erson that we owed the ''Practical Knowledge 
Class ;" and I am sure your pupils would all 
unite with me in a vote of thanks for those 
Wednesday afternoon instructions. 

The Memoir of Mr. Emerson I think is pub- 
lished, and I shall take an early opportunity 
to obtain it. In our reading circle, we are 
now engaged with the Life of Hannah More. 
There are two memoirs of her you know, 
the one by Eoberts, and the other by Mrs. 
Knight. We have both, and find them very 
interesting. We have read Cowper's Task, as 
the quotation you gave about winter evening 
led us to that. We intend reading his other 
poems, as we are delighted with his beautiM 
simplicity and fine thoughts; and wishing to 
become acquainted with the author, we shall 
endeavor to obtain his Life. Indeed, we have 
many books in prospect, and we do enjoy these 
reading afternoons very much. I do not know 
of a more delightful recreation ; and improve- 
ment goes hand in hand with pleasure. We 
are not only adding largely to our stock of 
ideas, but we are makipg acquaintance with 
persons of distinguished excellence, whose so- 
ciety is very agreeable. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 173 

At the same time, having so many thoughts 
to communicate to each other, we are improv- 
ing our conversational powers ; and I should 
not be surprised if another important result 
should follow before many weeks; for as we 
obtain ideas that we wish to preserve, it will 
be necessary to write them down, and thus I 
think some will find themselves writing articles 
before they know it. I have not yet said any 
thing about a paper, lest some of our number 
should be frightened away from the meetings. 
There are now thirteen in our circle. All are 
delighted because you permit them to share 
your letters. They try hard to prevail upon 
me to have mine read, but I tell them I must 
be excused until other members of the circle 
write something for the benefit of our little com- 
munity. We take turns in reading, and all 
have our sewing. 

We have found a very poor family in the 
lower part of the village, and are making 
clothes for the children, so that they can go to 
Sabbath-school. Each one contributed some- 
thing to buy the materials; some used their 
skill in cutting out the garments, and all take 
part in plying the needle. 

We meet now at each other's houses, and 



y Google 



174 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

are asaallj together from three o'clock P. M. 
until a little after eight. One of our rules is, 
to close so as to be at home by nine ; and an- 
other, that there must be no conversation not 
connected with the work, or with the reading. 
Since we began to meet at each other's houses, 
we have found another rule necessary, as we 
always stay to tea ; and this is, that there shall 
be no change from the ordinary method of pre- 
paring the meal. 

Another topic was brought up at our last 
meeting, upon which we wish your ideas. You 
will not need to cease writing very soon for 
want of a subject to employ your pen. In con- 
versing about the reading of Shakspeare, some 
one remarked, that if it is right to read his 
plays, it must be right to read novels. Upon 
this there was quite a discussion in regard to 
novel-reading, some being in favor of the prac- 
tice, and others opposed. At length Miss Brace 
suggested that we should solicit your views. 
Our request Is, that you will give us the rea- 
sons for and against this kind of reading. So 
now, dear Miss Stanley, you are quite drawn 
into business, and will write for the benefit of 
many, as well as to instruct and gratify your 

MABIA. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 175 



LETTER XXII. 

MY BEAEMAEIA: 

The account of your reading circle quite 
delights me. It is a fine illustration of the 
pleasure young people may enjoy, without re- 
sorting to amusements either decidedly injuri- 
ous or without any beneficial tendency. Why 
it is that, in a community distinguished for 
cultivation of mind, this kind of recreation is 
not more common, seems hard to understand. 
Some change, either in the home or school ed- 
ucation, must be necessary, that pleasures of 
an elevated character should be relished. I 
am convinced, in judging from results, that 
there is an error in the training of our sex; 
for while great advantages are open to them, it 
is still true that but few comparatively are re- 
ally intellectual. Why it is so, and what rem- 
edy can be devised to produce a change for the 
better, are questions of great practical impor- 
tance, in which we are all concerned. 

Undoubtedly one cause of woman's super- 
• ficial education is, that in our institutions for 
young ladies, more labor is laid out for a speci- 
fied time than can be well performed. Why 



y Google 



176 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBB. 

this is the case is a question of some interest. 
Whether it is owing to their superior quick- 
ness in acquiring knowledge, or to an indiflFer- 
ence in regard to their obtaining a thorough ed- 
ucation, I cannot say. This, however, I know to 
be true, that so long as our sex leave school while 
yet in their teens, their education will in some 
respects be superficial; for it is not to be sup- 
posed that, with an ordinary degree of precoc- 
ity, they can at so early an age pursue the 
higher branches with the profit that might be 
gained with a mind of more maturity. The 
manner in which some girls go through But- 
ler's Analogy is an evidence of this : jumbling 
together the trains of thought, having no con- 
ception of the arguments, and distorting the 
great truths there unfolded. There seems, 
indeed, an absurdity in expecting a girl of six- 
teen to pursue the close reasoning and grasp 
the thoughts of master-minds, and in a few 
months to become acquainted with what has 
cost years of profound thinking. If diplomas 
were not awarded, except to those who had 
attained at least the age of twenty, it would 
do something towards removing one of the ob- 
stacles in the way of woman's obtaining a thor- 
ough education. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 177 

Many young ladies, however, in their haste 
to leave school, abjure the course of study, 
attending only to what is most fashionable, 
and laying a book aside when they have ob- 
tained Br mere smattering of its contents. If 
they can drum a few tunes on the piano, re- 
peat a few French phrases, and perhaps know 
enough of algebra to talk about x and y, they 
are accomplished. 

This haste to relinquish advantages that 
might be longer enjoyed, I can only account 
for by supposing these fair young creatures 
so captivated by the brilliant scenes opening 
before them when released from the thraldom 
of the seminary, that they have no relish for 
its quiet pleasures and employments. To a 
mind occupied by the frivolities of fashionable 
life, dress, and vain amusements, the pursuit 
of science can hardly be congenial, and study 
must be irksome ; it is not therefore strange if 
little improvement is made, and that those per- 
mitted to pursue their own way, should leave 
school at a very early age and enter upon these 
fascinating pleasures. That many, long before 
the judgment is mature, are thus left to their 
own choice, is well known to teachers, as these 
important questions, where to attend school, 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



178 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

how long to continue there, and what studies 
to pursue, are often by the father and mother 
left to the decision of the child. Should the 
teacher presume to interfere with the wishes 
of the pupil, another school is sought,- and the 
little ruler goes where she imagines her direc- 
tions will receive more attention. This want 
of cooperation on the part of the parent, and 
these habits of insubordination and self-gratifi- 
cation, early formed and constantly indulged, 
present an insuperable obstacle to the efforts 
of instructors to render pupils thorough in the 
knowledge they profess to acquire. ** It is the 
children's world," is a reflection forced upon 
them, the parents having ceased to govern. 

Old discipline, indeed, ** overlooked and 
unemployed," seems to have '* sickened and 
died ;" and the results, plainly visible, are thus 
graphically described : 

"Then study langnished, emnlation slept, 
And yirtae fled. The schools became a scene 
Of solemn farce, where Ignorance in stilts, 
Hifl cap well line4 with logic not his own. 
With parrot-tongue performed the scholar's part, 
Proceeding soon a graduated dunce." 

It would indeed be surprising if these inex- 
perienced guides should direct wisely at an 
age when the feelings are most excitable, the 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 179 

passions strong, and the judgment weak ; or 
if, while temptations meet them at every torn 
captivating to the senses, and making large 
promises of pleasure, they should have energy 
of mind sufficient^to resist these allurements. 
How great the obligation of parents and teach- 
ers, by kindness and sound discretion, to guide 
these inexperienced ones in the pathway of 
wisdom ! 

You no doubt recollect a class of young 
ladies in our seminary, superficial in their ac- 
quirements, with no interest in any thing intel- 
lectual, often discontented and grumbling be- 
cause of their want of liberty ; while the theme 
upon which they delighted to dwell was, what 
a good time they would have when they ''got 
out of the old prison," and could go to parties 
and have as much company as they pleased. • 
Intent upou such thoughts and upon being freed 
from study, nothing could be thoroughly learn- 
ed : nor is it singular that, with anticipations 
like these, they should have left school young ; 
and when at liberty to pursue their own course, 
should have given themselves up to amuse- 
ments of the most frivolous character. , 

The remedy to be devised for correcting ^ 
these evils is apparent ; but what hope there is 



y Google 



180 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

of a change for the better I am unal)le to say, 
for it is hard to correct errors in those whose 
character is formed. Parents must enter into 
the work with all the heart, and parents and 
teachers must be united in performing their 
duty. But when I see these responsible sta- 
tions occupied by those who have little sense 
of their obligations, and others pressing into 
the ranks insensible of the duties that will 
soon devolve upon them, and making little 
eflfort to become fitted for their performance, 
I perceive little hope of a change for the bet- 
ter. Yet still I hope, and earnest shall be my 
eflforts to arouse my countrywomen to a sense 
of the much they have received, and of the 
much that of them is therefore required. Ear- 
nestly would I plead with those who have en- 
• tered the ranks of the great Captain of our 
salvation, to put on **the whole armor of God," 
and take a stand *' against the wiles of the 
devil," not parleying with the enemy nor as- 
suming his garb, thus helping on his machina- 
tioiis. Having sworn allegiance to their divine 
Leader, it surely becomes them to obey his 
injunctions, and to train the immortal beings 
committed to their charge to follow the same 
heavenly standard. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 181 

I rejoice that my dear Maria and her asso- 
ciates have escaped the whirl of fashionable 
amusements, and find pleasure in employments 
of an elevated character. What particularly 
pleases me in your reading circle, is the kind 
of books that occupy your attention — ^not friv- 
olous stories, but such as will improve your 
minds, and give right views of your duty to 
(xod and to your fellow-beings. 
- I am here reminded of the request of the 
ladies of your reading circle, that I would 
give them my thoughts on novel -reading; 
and you will please assure them that if I 
can aid them in their search for the right way, 
it will ever be to me a source of unfeigned 
pleasure. 

In writing upon this subject, the first step 
is to ascertain what a novel is. Of course it is* 
fiction, but it is not proper to give this name 
to all fiction. Webster's definition is, ** A fic- 
tion designed to illustrate the passions, partic- 
ularly that of love." We here obtain a pretty 
good idea of this species of composition, for 
such works are evidently not intended to im- 
press lessons of practical instruction, nor to 
lead one to feel the obligation to govern the 
passions; but by exhibiting their power, to 



y Google 



182 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

produce a story as exciting as possible, and 
thus minister to the appetite for pleasure. 

In a sermon which I recently heard, novels 
were denominated ''sensation literature," and 
were described as ''presenting false views of 
human life, 'so as to create a morbid desire for 
what is erratic, eccentric, rabid, unnatural ; got 
up merely to awaken unholy desires, to. feed 
the loose imagination and the prurient appe- 
tites of the young and inexperienced." This 
sensation literature, meeting one at every turn, 
in newspapers, magazines, cheap pamphlets, as 
well as in beautiful volumes, and being as irre- 
sistible in its influence as the fascination of a 
serpent, there cannot be too much earnestness 
ia warning you of the dg-nger of giving your- 
selves up to its indulgence. 

My good minister Dr. Murdock remarked, 
that "young women are more exposed to this 
noxious evil than young men, as miasma when 
confined to a secluded spot is more fatal than 
when the sun, the winds, the snow, the frost, 
and the rains reach it*" The fact that our sex 
very early in life become absorbed in this kind 
of reading is, doubtless, one cause of their su- 
perficial education; the taste being thus per- 
verted, and the mind rendered unwilling to 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 188 

make intellectual effort. The sciences are 
studied at school because they must be ; but on 
leaving the seminary their books are thrown 
aside, being done with for ever. Even history 
and biography, as well as all works which ex- 
ercise the reasoning powers, share the same 
fate* The education of such is of course super- 
ficial. . 

This species of fiction is of two kinds, novels 
and romances. In the romance, scenes are 
described that are wild and extravagant, and 
altogether fabulous; while in the novel the 
description is of apparently real events, but so 
highly colored that the mind is impressed with 
false views of human life. It would therefore 
seem that novels are most likely to be inju- 
rious, but romances fill the mind with foolish and 
ridiculous scenes and images. In either case 
the reader is introduced into an ideal world, 
both characters and events being overdrawn. 
Let a person become devoted to works of this 
description, she loses her interest in the every- 
day scenes^ of life, and yielding herself to this 
fascinating influence, neglects the most impor- 
tant duties, and abridges the hours of necessary 
repose. This amusement, like all others of this 
exciting character, should therefore be avoid- 



y Google 



184 YOUKO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

ed. The reading of novels unfits for this life, 
and that which is to come. All this might be 
said, even if the book could not be considered 
decidedly immoral ; bat how mach more fearful 
the influence, when it makes one familiar with 
impurity, vice, and crime. 

All works of fiction, however, are not to be 
condemned, for we shoi4d thus cast aside the 
most brilliant exhibitions of genius, together 
with the lessons of human wisdom which for 
ages have instructed mankind. 

There are books sometimes called novels 
which are not properly classed with this sen- 
sation literature, as they are moral tales de- 
signed to exhibit human life in its true charac- 
ter, and to impress the mind with leissons of 
practical wisdom. As an illustration of works 
of this description, we may mention Coelebs by 
Hannah More, and the Vicar of Wakefield by 
Goldsmith. 

It is also equally true, that there are many 
books profes_sing to be moral tales designed for 
the instruction of the young, which have a 
greater tendency to excite the feelings than to 
improve the heart, and it is not always easy to 
decide to which class the work belongs. 

Instruction by illustration has been found 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 185 

in all ages more powerfal than precept, and oar 
Saviour taught much by parables. In pursu- 
ing this method, the great object is to make the 
truth so apparent that there is a self-applica- 
tion ; thus the fables of jEsop impress the mind 
more forcibly than close reasoning. Allegories 
are but an extended fable, and the beauty and 
force of this kind of writing is felt by every one 
in reading the Pilgrim's Progress. 

In the same manner, by the relation of events 
not known to have occurred in the order in which 
they are related, or of deeds not perhaps per- 
formed by the persons to whom they are ascrib- 
ed, the benefit or the evil of any course of ac- 
tion may be illustrated, and moral lessons im- 
pressed upon the heart. Many works of this 
description, both in the old and the new world, 
have been published during the last forty years. 
But while much that is of great value has been 
added to the stock of reading, still it must be 
admitted that a torrent of trashy matter has 
issued from the press. Works of fiction, some 
of them truthful and instructive, others excit- 
ing and altogether of the character of novels, 
have been multiplied beyond measure. The 
abundance of this kind of literature, with the 
facilities for its circulation, has had an amaz- 



y Google 



186 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE, 

ing influence upon all classes, but particularly 
upon youth. One evil, amoiig others, resulting 
from this species of reading, is the habit of so 
generally gaining instruction from stories as to 
produce an aversion to receiving it in any way 
that is not entertaining, and consequently a 
distaste for what is useful and solid, as history, 
biography, and works of an elevated character 
both in prose and poetry. With many it would 
seem that there is no interest in books except 
as they furnish amusement. 

I have been delighted with the selection of 
reading which the ladies of your circle have 
made, as it shows that you have a higher ob- 
ject than mere selfish gratification, and that you 
are capable of relishing what, both in its moral 
and intellectual character, is truly worthy your 
attention. 

In looking over what I have written, I think 
you may perhaps be disposed to say that I 
have not, as you wiished, given the reasons for 
and against reading novels. I acknowledge 
that I have rather sought to show you that it 
requires thought and discrimination to make a 
selection of the rich treasures that in the world 
of mind are spread out before you. You can- 
not always tell what a book is by the appella- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUEE. 187 

tion that is given it, and while the advice of 
judicious friends is a great advantage, still it is 
important to acquire an ability to judge for 
one's self. It is not, however, necessary to go 
through a book in order to ascertain whether 
it is worth reading, any more than to drink a 
whole cask of wine to discover its quality ; a 
single sip is sufficient. So of a book, a glanc- 
ing over the table of contents, or of a few pages, 
will give its character. Do you find religion 
or the Scriptures treated with lightness or con- 
tempt, or do its pages contain, low, vulgar, or 
profane language, or is there an effort to un- 
dermine the principles of eternal truth, beware 
of its influence. Novels and romances, or works 
giving unreal views of human life, designed to 
excite the passions without conveying any good 
moral influence, often putting virtuous deeds 
and characters into a ridiculous light, while 
those who are vicious and guilty of crime are 
so exhibited as to be looked upon with admira- 
tion, these of course are to be entirely discard- 
ed. The more brilliant the genius of the author, 
and the more vividly the scenes and charac- 
ters are delineated, the greater the danger in 
perusing them. 

It is impossible to explore all the treasures 



y Google 



188 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

that have been brought to light by the efforts 
of human genius. The world is full of books 
that will repay your research, and as you can- 
not read them all, you need to exercise much 
judgment in the selection of those that shall 
receive your attention. It is surely absurd to 
remain unacquainted with the most gifted 
authors, while you throw away time with thoso 
that are unworthy your perusal. 

Works of imagination, are agreeable, and 
when weary one may find a pleasant relaxation 
in reading fiction, either in prose or poetry, 
that is lively or facetious, as, for instance, a 
story like John Gilpin, or the Spectator. 

I believe I had better bring my letter to a 
close, though I seem not to know where to stop. 
Yours truly, 

M. STANIiEY. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUEE. 189 



LETTER XXIII. 

MY DEAR TEACHER : 

Yours was received just in time for our 
reading circle yesterday. I had hardly oppor- 
tunity to look it over before meeting the ladies. 
Every one seemed on the tiptoe of expecta- 
tion, eager to learn your views on a subject 
upon which we had aU become intensely inter- 
ested. Last Thursday we had quite a discus- 
sion upon the important theme, and found our- 
selves greatly nonplussed in regard to what 
might be called novels. In our perplexity we 
had recourse to the dictionary, but this, while 
it gave some light on the subject, left us still 
very much in the, dark. What, for instance, 
could we call Miss Edgeworth's tales, or Mrs. 
Sherwood's, or Charlotte Elizabeth's ; some of 
them more religious than others, but yet noth- 
ing but stories? Then *^ Wide, Wide World," 
"Flower of the Family," **City and Country 
Life," and a host of 'other books were brought 
up, that we did not know whether to call novels 
or not. Your distinction between a novel and 
moral tale was just what we needed, and we 



y Google 



190 TOUNa LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

thought we coald see it very plainly, though I 
think it must require a nice discrimination to 
determine to which class some books belong. 

That what you so plainly described as "sen- 
sation literature " should be altogether discard- 
ed, seemed plain to us all; and the character 
given of it was so graphic, that it would seem 
easy to decide what books belong to this class, 
yet I think it sometimes would be difficult. 
One must be very free from prejudice, and give 
close attention, in order to come to a right de- 
cision. The advice of judicious friends seems 
very desirable for a young person in ascertain- 
ing the character of a book that she is disposed 
to read ; but I have been amused at the differ- 
ent opinions given by wise people about the 
same work: some looking at it, I suppose, in 
one light, and some in another, as it is with 
dancing. 

In our circle some of the ladies expressed 
much regret that they had wasted so much 
time in light reading; others, that they had 
been, in the habit of going through a book just 
to get the story, skipping over thB moral les- 
sons. In some of the moral tales this is quite 
easy, as in the '*Lady of the Manor." Miss 
Macy said she never had a thought but that 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 191 

she might read whatever came in her way, if 
she took a fancy to it ; but she wondered how 
she could have lived so long, without finding 
oat what now seemed so plain. 

I read from Mrs. Eicord's Mental Philoso- 
phy, the account that she gives of the lady who 
had such a passion for novels, that she sat up 
nights to read, thus bringing on severe nervous 
headaches, so that she was unable to attend to 
her family. At length, his home being so 
uncomfortable, her husband spent his leisur.e 
hours at a tavern, became a drunkard, and sunk 
to ruin; while she and her children found a 
refuge in an almshouse. It seems as though 
such aa instance as this might Tead one to take 
warning not to yield to this foolish indulgence ; 
but no one intends to go quite so far, and each 
one thinks she can stop when she pleases. 

I really believe that one great cause of a 
superficial education among young ladies is the 
reading of stories. Many in your seminary 
were in the habit of spending much time in this 
manner. I have often seen magazines and 
newspapers, so hidden, that the teacher would 
suppose the girls were studying, when they 
^ere absorbed with a story. I have noticed 
such ones in the class, to see how little they 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



192 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

knew of the lesson ; they either being entirely 
silent, or else chiming in when some one else 
was speaking. I should think the mental pow- 
ers would be weakened by going over that 
which requires no effort of mind, and the moral 
sense is surely benumbed by a constant repe- 
tition of that which is known to be wrong. 

Another question, Miss Stanley, I want to 
ask you : What do you think of Sabbath-school 
books? In our discussions about novel-read- 
ing, there has been much said of them. Some 
of our ladies insist that there are novels in 
these libraries. They say that it is from these 
books that they have acquired a taste- for such 
reading, and that your definition of a novel is 
an exact description of thedi. 

Please give us your thoughts in your next 
letter. 

Your mjjssjl 



lecf by Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 193 



LETTER XXIV. 

MY DEAR MARIA: 

I rejoice that your circle are so much inter- 
ested in my letters, and feel that they receive 
from them profit as well as pleasure. Nothing 
renders me more happy than to be the means 
of improvement to the youth of my country. I 
trust that you and your companions will all be 
active in this great work, each diffusing in the 
sphere in which she moves an elevating and 
purifying influence. For what should we wish 
to live, but to be blessings in the world in which 
for a little time we are permitted to have a 
home? May we all be followers of Him who 
when on earth went about doing good.' 

You ask my opinion respecting Sabbath- 
school books. This I am willing to give, though 
I may differ from others whom I love and es- 
teem. In reply, I must say that from the first 
of my having any knowledge of these libraries, 
I have always found some books that seemed to 
me unsuitable for Sabbath reading ; and as all 
children, as well as others, understand that 
these books are designed to be read on this 

9 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



194 YOUNa LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

day, I infer, that patting them into the hands 
of the young, has an influence contrary to the 
teachings of the word of God. 

I am aware that this remark may subject 
me to the charge of being puritanical, and that 
by some very worthy persons; but it is a 
charge that I consider most honorable, for with 
our Puritan fathers I do hold to the obligation 
to keep holy the Sabbath, and I condemn every 
thing that has a tendency to lessen the rever* 
ence for this holy day. How it can be keep- 
ing the Sabbath holy to engage in any reading 
which is not decidedly religious, I cannot un- 
derstand ; nor how it can be teaching children 
obedience to the divine command, to put into 
their hands such books as are merely amusing, 
proper to be read on week-days, but having no 
influence to bring them to a knowledge of Grod. 
Is it not tempting them to violate this sacred 
day? 

I must also say that I have been pained to 
see, in these sacred depositories, books which 
are more distinguished for the fascination of 
the story than for any good instruction, and 
which have a great resemblance to, that class 
which are called novels. I am not therefore 
surprised at the remarks of your ladies, bui 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUEB. 196 

regret that there is so much reason for their 
being made. It is, I fear, but too true, tW 
young people, captivated by the perusal of these 
Sabbath-school books, have strengthened, if 
they have not acquired, a taste for that kind 
of reading which we must absolute]^ con- 
demn. 

Another evil which may be considered a 
result of placing works of this character in ' 
these libraries is, a neglect of the Bible. It 
is hard to leave an exciting story; and be- 
sides, it must be finished, so as to be returned 
and get another ; and thus the Bible is not read, 
and even the Sabbath-school lesson is not well 
learned, the sacred hours of this holy day be- ^ 
ing spent amid the exciting scenes of the beau- 
tiful fiction, and even the time of divine service 
devoted to the interesting book. Such read- 
ing destroys the rftish for the teachings of di- 
vine inspiration, and leads to a habit of irrev- 
erence in the house of God. 

I have long mourned over these evils, and 
sought to do what I could for their prevention ; 
sometimes removing those books which I knew 
ought not to be in the library, and putting oth- 
ers in their places ; directing my pupils in the 
choice of reading, and ever striving to impress 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



196 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

them with a sense of their obligation to ''re- 
member the Sabbath-day, and keep it holy," 
and to spend its sacred hours in searching the 
word of Gk)d, and in listening to the glorious 
gospel of our Lord and Saviour. 

Among the sins of our day, none are more 
marked than a neglect of the Bible, a violation 
of the Sabbath, and the profaning of God's 
name ; and in this blessed institution, the Sab- 
bath-school, instead of a temptation to the com- 
mission of these sins, the most earnest eflforte 
should be made to stay the tide of evil that is 
sweeping over our land. 

I have given you the dark shades of the 
picture, but there is a brighter view. A large 
proportion of the volumes collected in these 
libraries are well chosen, containing exhibi- 
tions of divine truth clearly delineated, both 
precepts and doctrines illustrated, and applied 
to the heart and conscience. Children and 
youth, by perusing these simple teachings, and 
becoming acquainted with those who have been 
eminent for their devotion to the service of 
God, have often been led to embrace the Sav- 
iour,- and fitted for usefulness in the church 
and the world. We may therefore reckon Sab- 
bath-school books as one of the means for the 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 197 

diflFdsion of divine truth, and the advancement 
of the kingdom jpf the Redeemer. 

I have written on, giving you a view of 
the subject in its different lights, according to 
my own deep convictions. As many of you are 
teachers in the Sabbath-school, I trust the hints 
I have thrown out may lead you to feel more 
deeply your obligations to those committed to 
your charge. Besides impressing the tender 
mind with the truths in the lesson for the day, 
there is duty to be performed in regard to the 
book that has been read, and in guiding each 
member of your class in the choice of another ; 
but especially should you lay open the rich 
treasures of the word of iruth, and lead your 
pupils to search this blessed charter of all our 
hopes. 

I feel deeply anxious that Sabbath-school 
teachers themselves should carefully study this 
sacred volume. They cannot be too well ac- 
quainted with this treasury of divine know- 
ledge. It is an inexhaustible mine. The more 
deeply it is explored, the richer the ore. I 
have often been pained with the inattention of 
young Christians to the Bible, and their conse- 
quent ignorance of its sacred contents. Per- 
haps this is owing to the great multiplication 



y Google 



198 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

of books ; though th« character of those that 
are read has, I think, the greater influence in 
diminishing the interest in these divine ora- 
cles. 

But what book can compare with the Bible? 
In literary merit, in beauty of imagery, in sub- 
limity and pathos, no composition of ancient or 
modem times bears any comparison with the 
sacred writings. Nor is this surprising ; for 
the authors, moved by the Holy Ghost, speak 
of the loftiest theme that ever entered the miind 
of mortals, and into which angels desire to look, 
the wonderful scheme of redemption ; that 
** God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

Not only have we the prophetic writings, 
in which this great truth is so distinctly re- 
vealed to fallen man, but we have the New 
Testament of our Lord and Saviour, where this 
plan of redeeming love is so clearly unfolded, 
and the terms of acceptance so plainly made 
known, that even a little child may become 
wise unto salvation, through faith in Jesus, 
Christ. What so likely to move the hard and 
impenitent heart, as to read of the deeds of love 
performed by the blessed Saviour while here on 



y Google 






YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 109 

earth, to follow him through the scenes of Geth- 
semane and Calvary, and then to behold this 
same Saviour rising from the dead, and ascend- 
ing to heaven, assured that he ever liveth to 
make intercession for us ? 

How precious the privilege to be permitted 
to make known this wondrous scheme of rcr 
deeming love to children, and ere they have 
been hardened in sin, to bring them to that 
Saviour who has said, ** Suffer little' children 
to come unto me, and forbid them not." With 
the commission, ** Go ye into all the world, and 
preach the gospel to every creature," how can 
those whose hearts are burning with love to 
Him who hath loved them, and given himself 
for them, refrain from dedicating themselves, 
and all they have and are, to the promotion of 
his blessed cause ? 

May we all give ourselves wholly to this 
work. * ^ 

With much love, 

M. STAlOiET. 



y Google 



900 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 



LETTER XXV. 

"How grateful we are to our dear Miss 
Stanley for her letter," is the feeling of all the 
ladies of our circle. The Bible — I trust we 
shall all read it more than we have done, and 
that as Sabbath-school teachers we shall be 
more faithful. 

In regard to Sabbath-school books, your 
ideas are just what I thought they would be. 
There are those perhaps in every library that 
ought not to be there, but at the same time 
each library comprises a great amount of val- 
uable reading. I believe many good persons 
as well as yourself feel the importance of be- 
ing more careful in the selection of books. 

I have sometimes, especially of late, put 
away my library book, thinking it hardly suit- 
able for the Sabbath. I wonder, however, that 
I did not see that it was improper that such 
books should be in those libraries. 

I should think some of our ladies had be- 
fore had serious thoughts on the subject. Miss 
Sill said that her father, though not a professor 
of religion, had often expressed a disapproba- 
tion of books brought from the Sabbath-school, 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 201 

sajing that his mother would not have allowed 
Mm to read such on the Sabbath. Misa Doty 
remarked that she had often thought there 
were many in the library unsuitable for this 
day; but she had never dared to speak of it, 
for as these books were published b^ a relig- 
ious society, and selected by persons much 
better than herself, she thought she ought not 
to consider it wrong to have them there, or to 
read them on the Sabbath. Miss Noble was 
very certain that it was from these books she 
had acquired her taste for novels; and all 
united in insisting that it was in this way 
they had formed the habit of reading stories. 

I think it important to direct pupils in the 
selection of books, and to question them about 
what they have read. , I trust that we as teach- 
ers shall feel more deeply our obligation to 
instruct our classes in the right manner. 

At the close of the reading circle, several 
remained, and proposed that we should have a 
prayer-meeting on Saturday afternoon, to im- 
plore the Divine blessing on our Sabbath- 
school, and especially to plead with our heav- 
enly Father that we as teachers may be faith- 
ful, and that through our instrumentality the 
members of our classes may be brought to the 

9* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



202 YOUNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 

Saviour. There were six who agreed to meet 
at our house. I know this will rejoice the 
heart of my dear teacher, and that she will 
unite with us in praying for a blessing upon 
those for whom she feels so deep an interest, 
and in giving thanks to God for this indication 
of the influences of the Holy Spirit being poured 
out upon us. 

There is a great change here. It hardly 
seems like the same place. Morning prayer- 
meetings have been commenced, and are fully 
attended. There are many who seem very 
serious, and others who are rejoicing in the 
love of Jesus. There is a deep feeling among 
the members of our circle, and I hope they 
will all come to the Saviour without delay. 

The closing part of your letter afiFected us 
much. How glorious the plan of salvation, 
and what a precious privilege that we may be 
the instruments of bringing others to an exper- 
imental acquaintance with this amazing display 
of divine grace. 

I think we cannot study the Bible too 
much. I know that having an abundance of 
good reading is very apt to lead to a neglect 
of this blessed book. Then it is often read 
carelessly, or without due reflection. I feel 



y Google 



YOUNG LAPY OF PLEASUBE. 203 

that this is the case with me. The daily 
reading too is not in course, but at any place 
where one happens to open, so that there is no 
regard to its connection, and some portions are 
never read at all. Some like the poetical parts, 
others the historical, while few take any inter- 
est in the prophecies; and there is so little 
thought, that the meaning is not well under- 
stood, and but little impression made upon the 
heart. I think it would be a great blessing to 
the youth of this country if the Bible were 
studied in our schools, as it is in the mission- 
ary schools among the Nestorians. The con- 
verts there seem to have a deeper knowledge 
of the Scriptures than young Christians in this 
highly favored land. 

I have for some time been intending to ask 
your advice about the reading of poetry. The 
members of . our circle do not think alike 
about it. Some would prefer to have nothing 
else, and others take but little interest in what 
I should consider a very beautiful poem. As 
all think you are correct in your views, I pre- 
sume what you would say would tend to pro- 
duce a unity of feeling on this subject. 
Your affectionate 

MABIA. 



y Google 



2M YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER XXVI. 

MYDEABMABIA: 

Much was I affected by your letter. I do 
rejoice in the tidings that the Spirit*of Gk)d is 
moving upon the hearts of that dear circle of 

young ladies in B , whose advancement in 

a higher life has been a subject of so much 
interest to me. I rejoice to know that any of 
them iare led to unite in imploring divine 
assistance in the performance of duty, and in 
pleading for a blessing upon their eflforts to 
lead others to Christ. I trust soon to be 
cheered with the intelligence that all have a 
heart to join in these petitions at the mercy-, 
seat, and in ascriptions of praise to Him who 
hath brought them out of darkness into mar- 
vellous light. I do indeed unite in giving 
thanks to G-od that you are sharing in those 
blessed influences now so abundantly poured 
out upon thousands in this Our highly favored 
land. The great Hearer of prayer will listen 
to your petitions, and the blessing will rest not 
only upon yourselves, but upon your pupils, 
your associates, and friends. Let your active 



y Google 



YOTJNa LADT OF PLEASURE. 206 

efforts and your prayers go together ; speak 
often one to another on this glorious theme, 
the Saviour's love ; by your example recom- 
mend the religion you profess to those with 
whom you mingle from day to day ; and do not 
fear to tell, to those who are ignorant of the 
way of life, the greatness of this salvation. 

Your letter has led me to realize, even more 
than I had before, that Christians cannot be too 
careful that every thing they do should be con- 
sistent with the principles of the gospel. How 
many of the habits practised by professors of 
religion seem to the unconverted quite incon- 
sistent ; as, for instance, worldly conversation 
and reading on the Sabbath, and the indispo- 
sition ever to speak of Him whom they profess 
to love supremely. The vanity and love of 
dress sometimes very apparent in Sabbath- 
school teachers, and their taking the time which 
should be spent in the instruction of their classes 
to chat with each other in a low voice, even 
little children notice; and of. course the influ- 
ence is very far from being what is desirable 
to be impressed upon their pliant minds. How • 
much watchfulness is necessary, that the good 
designed to be accomplished should not be 
'*evil spoken of;" and that those who enter 



y Google 



a06 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBB. 

the fold of Christ should "have a good report 
of those that are without." The command of 
our Saviour, ** Let your light so shine before 
men, that they may see your good works, and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven," should 
ever be the watchword of his followers. 

A neglect of God's word has led to a fear- 
fal departure from the truth, and given entrance 
to many errors, both of doctrine and practice, 
into the church of Christ; and a marked fea- 
ture, even of this age of Sabbath -schools, is 
ignorance of the Bible. This assertion I would 
not make, if I had not found it true by my own 
experience in teaching children of pious par- 
ents as well as others, many of them having 
become members of the church before being 
placed under my charge. I have not only 
found an ignorance of the Bible, but an indif- 
ference in studying it ; and in no effort have 
I f?lt more discouragement than in seeking 
to produce an interest in this best of all 
books. 

I am pleased with your request for my 
thoughts on the reading of poetry; for there is 
much that I would like to say on this subject 
Its great influence in the formation of character 
is one view that we may take; and we may 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 207 

also consider it, as one of the fine arts, an abun- 
dant source of pleasure. 

I have already referred to the influence of 
reading upon the mind ; but of two books, the 
one that produces the stronger emotions is lon- 
ger remembered, and therefore has the greater 
power in moulding the character. That poetry* 
is more easily learned than prose, is what I sup- 
pose every one admits, or knows by experience 
to be true. This is owing in part to its influence 
in producing emotion ; for the thoughts are thus 
deeply engraven on the soul, and the impres- 
sion cannot be easily eflfaced. 

The formation of character is each one's 
own work. It is indeed begun by parents, 
particularly by the mother, but it is carried 
on by the individual himself. The persons 
with whom one associates, the books that are 
read, as well as the advantages for education 
to which one has access, all have an influence 
in moulding and fashioning the soul ; but man 
is a voluntary agent, and these are instruments 
employed by him according to his own pleas- 
ure. He may use his talents, and thus increase 
them ; or, like the slothful servant, he may bury 
them in the earth. He may train his mind 
aright, rendering it strong and vigorous, stored 



y Google 



aOe TOUNG LADT OF PLEAST7BE. 

with pare and elevated conceptions ; or he may 
yield to an idle inaction, an indulgence of evil 
passions, and suffer it to become the receptacle 
of what is loathsome and corrupt. 

Dear Maria, you thus see how great is our 
responsibility. Let us look only at the influ- 
ence, in the formation of character, of the books 
that we read, and we cannot but have some 
sense of the consequences resulting from the 
selection th^^t we make of the thoughts that 
shall thus enter the mind. A library is open 
to us, and the choice presented of mingling with 
the trifling, the vulgar, and profane, or with 
minds pure, lofty, and refined. We may be 
conversant with poets, orators, philosophers, 
and divines; not only with those who have 
drunk deep at the fountains of Buman know- 
ledge, but with those enlightened from above; 
we may commune with prophets and apostles, 
and even with the blessed Immanuel, **God 
manifest in the flesh." On the other hand, we 
may choose the society of the vicious and the 
corrupt, the devotees of mammon or of fashion; 
we may waste our time and expend our ener- 
gies in becoming familiar with scenes of folly 
and dissipation, or of malignity and crime. 
To decide therefore what books to read^ espe- 



y Google 



TOUN^G LADY OF PLEASUBE. 209 

daily among those which have the greatest 
power in moving the soul and moulding the 
character, is of amazing importance, and de- 
mands oar most earnest attention. 

Let us take two poets of the most marked 
character, as an illustration of the choice that 
is before us, and consider the influence to which 
one is voluntarily subjected by perusing the 
poems of the one or of the other. 

Milton and Byron have ranked among those 
who stand highest in that country which, in mod- 
ern times, has given birth to more heroes of 
song than any other, and both are distinguished 
for power of intellect and transcendent genius. 
The one now bears the soul aloft, as he sub- 
limely soars beyond the ken of mortals, and 
then introduces you into scenes of such sur- 
passing loveliness, that you are enraptured 
by the view. The other breathes into his de- 
scriptions a soul-stirring charm, and clothes his 
thoughts with beauties so sparkling that the 
feelings are touched with a thrill of delight. 
No two authors, however, more opposite in 
moral character, and in ^he apparent object for 
which they wrote, could be selected. The in- 
fluence of the one is elevating ; of the other, 
often deadening to the moral sensibility. Mil- 



y Google 



210 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

ton, impelled by a lofty philanthropy, exerts 
hi8 almost snperhaman intellect to vindicate the 
ways of God, and to inspire reverence, devo- 
tion, and love ; while Byron, fired with a foul 
misanthropy, exercises the greatest genius 
perhaps ever thus prostituted, to produce a 
spirit of malevolence and dissatisfaction; thus 
blighting the buds of virtue, and extinguishing 
in man the love of his fellow-man. Of the two, 
Byron is the more fascinating. Indeed, in his 
writings are found inimitable touches of the 
beautifel, and gems of sparkling lustre; yet 
misanthropy, scorn, and revenge so possess 
his soul as to darken his mental vision, and 
array before him images most dire and hateful. 
In becoming acquainted with his early history, 
we find a cause for this in the maternal influ- 
ence by which his character was mould,ed ; and 
we cannot but feel the sincerest pity for this 
misguided son of genius. Still, while we pity 
we may not sympathize, nor should we suffer 
his unholy thoughts to find an entrance into 
our minds. 

That Milton's great work, "Paradise Lost," 
is not more read by the youth of the present 
day, is probably owing to its elevated charac- 
ter. The poet soars so high, and brings forth 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 211 

conceptions so grand, that to be understood and 
relished, one must have a highly cultivated 
mind — b, mind capable of grasping these lofty 
ideas, and of discovering their truth and beauty. 
** There must be some music in the soul that is 
to appreciate the genius of Milton." Seek then, 
dear Maria, to attain that power of thought, 
and that relish for the truly beautiful and sub- 
lime, which will enable you to find delight in 
the pure fountains of heavenly love, rather 
than in the poisoned streams of earth-born 
malevolence. 

There are many other English bards, stand- 
ard authors, their works having stood the test 
of time, whose poetry, while a source of pleas- 
ure, fills the mind with pure and lofty thoughts, 
and has a refining and an elevating influence 
upon the character. It is, however, hardly 
possible to give you much conception of their 
beauty and excellence in the compass of a let- 
ter. A few, whom you will probably regard 
as my favorites, I will mention. First I will 
speak of Cowper, who is so surpassingly sweet 
in painting the scenes and socialities of domes- 
tic life, so eminently a Christian poet, opening 
a pure fount at which you may quaff the rich- 
est nectar without fear of poison to the soul, 



y Google 



219 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

that I trust you will often here resort to slake 
your thirst for pleasure. Thomson, as beauti- 
M and picturesque in his description of scenes 
in nature, as Cowper of fireside enjoyments and 
the various incidents interwoven in the web of 
human life, equally pure and elevated in his 
thoughts, leading through these luxuriant paths 
to the great Source of all, surely he should be 
read, and not glanced over with careless inat- 
tention. Both of these poets impress the soul 
with truth, causing the objects and events daily 
passing before us to speak in words of wisdom, 
and bidding us fasten our hopes on Him who 
holds the universe in his hands. 

Gladly would I go on and expatiate upon 
the beautiful simplicity of Groldsmith, and the 
touching tenderness of Hemans ; the lofty con- 
ceptions of Young, and the evangelical strains 
of Montgomery ; I would introduce you to Scott 
and Burns, Pollock and Wordsworth — ^would 
tell you of their sparkling thoughts, and the 
rich gems dripping with beauty that ever and 
janon will meet your eye ; but time would fail me. 
The character of a poet generally gives charac- 
ter to tis poetry. It is true indeed, as in the 
case of Byron and Moore, wicked men may 
sometimes give us beautiful gems of sacred 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 218 

poesy, or, like Burns, may sometimes guard 
against irreverence in speaking of sacred things, 
yet we do not feel the safety in reading their 
works, that we do in reading Montgomery, 
Cowper, or Thomson, who wrote no line which, 
** dying, they would wish to blot." 

I would not pass unnoticed our own bards, 
those in whose poetic effusions there is the soul 
of melody. It is true, no great work like that 
of Milton graces our literature ; still, taste and 
genius are exhibited in many beautiful crea- 
tions, as in those of Bryant, Halleck, Sigour- 
ney, and Longfellow ; but I presume you are 
more or less conversant with them, and with 
others who have touched the heart by their 
mellifluent strains. There is a volume of the 
''Female Poets" of our country, and also of 
** British Female Poets," which you will love 
to read, and in which you will find some pre- 
cious gems. 

A good arrangement would be, frequently 
to have a poetical selection, or else an after- 
noon set apart entirely for the reading of poe- 
try. Both your pleasure and your improvement 
will be increased by bringing before the mind 
beautiful thoughts expressed in beautiful lan- 
guage. 



y Google 



2U YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

But while enamerating the writers of poe- 
try that are worthy of your attention, I would 
not fail to remind you that of all authors, both 
ancient and modem, none can compare with 
those divinely appointed to make known to us 
the oracles of eternal truth. The poetry of the 
sacred volume, having a theme more exalted 
than was ever conceived by men or angels, 
the Holy Grhost inspiring the writers to pour 
forth from a full soul these glorious revelations, 
must indeed rise to a loftier height than any 
mere human composition. Their souls kindled 
by fire from the altar of GTod, and attuned to 
heavenly symphonies, they seem to have dip- 
ped the pen in living light, and to give us the 
language of heaven. 

In this Book of books we find all the vari- 
eties of poetic composition in the highest per- 
fection ; and the writers, while they reach the 
most exalted heights of grandeur and sublim- 
ity, at the same time, in beauty of thought and 
expression, have no equal. 

The sweet Psalmist of Israel now lifts the 
soul above all sublunary things, and we behold 
the Almighty, as **He bowed the heavens, and 
came down ; and darkness was under His feet: 
and He rod^ upon a cherub, and did fly ; yea, 



y Google 



TOUNG LADT OP PLEASUBE. 216 

He did fly upon the wings of the wind ;" and 
then we look upon this same infinite Being 
as our "Shepherd," and by him are led into 
the ** green pastures," and "beside the still 
waters." 

The wise man gives us a treasure of "un- 
strung pearls." These divine teachings are 
expressed in striking comparisons and pithy 
antitheses ; and the more we dwell upon these 
terse and pointed exhibitions of truth, the more 
are our minds imbued with heavenly wisdom. 

In the book of Job we have a dramatic 
poem, abounding with lofty imagery and brill- 
iant thoughts, most fully unfolding the varie- 
ties of human character, and giving exalted 
conceptions of the great Author of the universe. 
Now we mingle in scenes and with characters 
true to the experience of every-day life, and 
then we are permitted to have a glimpse of the 
unseen world, and views of awful sublimity 
burst upon us. 

An attentive study of the prophetic writ- 
ings exalts our conceptions of God,' while it 
fills the soul with a sense of his infinite love in 
making known his designs of mercy to a lost 
and guilty world. In reading of the judgments 
denounced upon the enemies of God's chosen 



y Google 



216 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

ones, as well* as upon his own disobedient peo- 
ple, and of the execution of these judgments as 
divinely foretold, we are impressed with the 
infinite knowledge, truth, and justice of Jeho- 
vah, and the fearfiilness of daring to sin against 
the supreme Ruler of the universe. 

The diflferent writers of this part of the 
word of God have in their poetic style each a 
diflferent character. Jeremiah, the weeping 
prophet, is distinguished for a touching pathos, 
a melting tenderness; and we see in him a 
type of the Man of sorrows as he wept over 
Jerusalem. 

Isaiah the evangelical prophet, his lips 
touched with sacred fire, pours forth strains of 
surpassing sublimity a^ he beholds the day 
when *'a Child is born," "the government 
upon his shoulders," his name, *' Wonderful, 
Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting 
Father, the Prince of peace." In a burst of 
holy rapture he exclaims, ** Comfort ye, com- 
fort ye my people, saith your God ;" then calls 
upon all to ** prepare the way of the Lord," 
while in prophetic vision he beholds the fore- 
runner of the Messiah, and declares that ''the 
glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all 
flesh shall see it together." 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF iPLEASUBE. 217 

The visions of Ezekiel, though more ob- 
scure, are full t)f sublimity. In bold figures 
and elevated language an earnest is given of 
the latter day glory, and the divine assurance 
is recorded: ** I will bring again the captivity 
of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house 
of Israel." 

But, dear Maria, you are probably begin- 
ning to think I have become so much absorbed 
in my favorite theme, that I have forgotten I 
am writing a letter. And then it was poetry 
upon which you wished me trf write, while as 
usual I have poured out my thoughts upon the 
beauty and excellence of the Scriptures. You 
will however excuse me, as you will see that I 
could not well pass oyerjthe sacred poets when 
calling your attention to others. I think in- 
deed, as I read what I have written, that I 
have said enough to lead you to feel the great 
influence of poetry in the formation of char- 
acter; and of poetry as one of the fine arts I 
will write in my next. 

With much love, your friend, 

M. STANLEY. 



10 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



218 YOUNQ LAPY OF PLEASUBE. 



LETTER XXVII. 

HT DEAB MISS STANLEY: 

Our prayer-meeting on Saturday was very 
interesting and solemn. Thene were seven of 
ns that had agreed to meet, but two others 
came, both of them Sabbath-school teachers, 
though not professedly pious. There was no 
disposition to decline taking a part in the 
meeting; and oiir lesson for Sabbath-school, 
which was the first eleven verses of the third 
chapter of the Acts, furnished a theme upon 
which we had an interesting conversation. 

In the reading of •your letter yesterday, a 
very serious attention was manifested. In the 
conversation that followed, the obligation of 
Christians to avoid even the appearance of 
evil was spoken of with much feeling. The 
responsibility that rests upon each one in the 
formation of her own character, seemed to be 
a subject to which but little thought had before 
been given. Miss Noble appeared much moved, 
though she said nothing. When I began to 
read the comparison between Milton and By- 
ron, I could discover a look of displeasure on 



y Google 



TOUNQ LADY OF PLEASUBE. 219 

the countenances of some, but there was noth- 
ing expressed after I had finished. I thought 
perhaps Byron might have been a favorite au- 
thor. Miss Kelsey said that she should after 
this be more particular in her selection of 
books ; while Miss PVince remarked, that if it 
is a matter of so much importance what one 
reads, it was strange she had never heard 
something said of it before. 

It never occurred to me that poetry has so 
much greater influence upon the mind than 
prose ; and yet I know if any thing is put in 
rhyme or poetical measure, we are not likely 
to forget it. Every one remembers the little 
ditty about the number of days in a month. I 
think I have read that^ the early ages laws 
were promulgated in verse, and that Homer 
was a wandering minstrel, going around sing- 
ing his own verses, the people remembering 
them ; and thus they were preserved, though 
his poems were not collected into a book until 
long after his time. 

It is so hard to expel wrong thoughts from 
the mind, that I am sure we ought not to read 
such an author as Byron. His Hebrew Melo- 
dies are beautiful ; and ideas of an evil charac- 
ter, expressed in such poetry, must make an im- 



y Google 



S20 YOUKO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

pression not easily removed. I think I must 
read Milton's Paradise Lost I never became 
mach interested in it at school, I suppose be- 
cause my mind was not sufficiently cultivated 
to enable me to enter into his sublime and 
beautiful thoughts. 

It was not necessary to make an apology 
for writing so much about the Bible. We 
were all delighted with the part of your letter 
in which you brought the sacred volume be- 
fore us, and sought to impress us with the 
beauty of the different writers. I think we 
shall all read the books of t^ie prophets more 
than we have done. I am reading the Bible 
through in course, and several others have 
commenced. I could not help thinking what 
a difference there must be between the soul of 
a novel-reader, and of one who is in the habit 
of carefully reading the word of God. What 
a contrast in the thoughts that find an entrance 
into the mind, the scenes that pass in review, 
moving the feelings, and giving exercise to the 
imagination. I shall not after this, I am sore, 
read any thing without considering whether 
it will have a right influence in forming my 
character. 

Your MAMA. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 221 



LETTER XXVIII. 

MY DEAR MAMA: 

I believe I promised in this letter to speak 
of poetry as a source of pleasure ; but I would 
like first to allude to the wonderful nature with 
which we are endowed. Man, formed "from 
the dust <rf the ground" by the breath of the 
Almighty, was made a "living soul." The 
earth, the air, and the water had been peopled 
with their various inhabitants, each species 
adapted to the element in which it was placed, 
and thus capable of receiving pleasure ; but 
man, the last great work of the divine Creator, 
although made with a corporeal nature like the 
brute, was endued with a spiritual existence, 
and thus allied to the angelic throng before the 
throne of GTod. Hence, though surrounded by 
the various tribes of the anipaal creation, he 
was alone ; having an ability to rise above the 
pleasures of sense, and find his delight in com- 
munion with the Author of his being. By the 
fall, though he lost the moral likeness of God, 
yet reason is still his distinguishing attribute, 
and thus he is enabled to explore the wonders 
of the visible universe, to enter the world of 



y Google 



222 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

mind, to trace effects to causes, and to rise to 
the great First Cause of all. He therefore is 
not only susceptible of sensual pleasures, but 
finds his highest enjoyment in those things 
which are spiritual and unseen. In view of 
this, we may well exclaim, 

"How poor, how rich, how abject, how angust, 
How complicate, how wonderful is niaiir' 

By this double nature, considering him a 
creature of sense and a spiritual being, we may 
account for the variety of character that con- 
tinually presents itself. Let his lower nature 
rule, his pleasure be sought in the gratification 
of his animal propensities, and he sinks to a 
level with the herds of the stall ; but let him 
cultivate his higher nature^ and feast his soul 
with spiritual dainties, how lofty the height to 
which he soars, how vast the conceptions that 
fill his mind, how exalted his sources of enjoy- 
ment ! Even in the exercise of the senses, there 
is in man an amazing superiority over the brute 
creation ; for while beings destitute of reason 
af e susceptible of mere animal gratification, to 
him by the eye and the ear is opened a wide 
field of intellectual delight and avenues of 
pleasure, by which his character is elevated 
and refined. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 223 

I might dwell on the superiority of man 
as a rational and moral being, but I wish now 
more particularly to direct your attention to 
his ability for receiving pleasure, and to speak 
of these higher powers as connected with the 
sensitive, or of the aesthetic part of our nature. 
In this connection, I may remind you of the 
variety and abundance of objects that, to the 
person of cultivated mind, are sources of enjoy-* 
ment. 

"Not a breeze 
flies o*er the meadow, not a cloud imbibes 
The setting son's effulgence, not a strain 
From aU the tenants of the warbling shade 
Ascends, but whence his bosom can partake 
Fresh pleasure unreproyed." 

*^ For him the spring 
Distils her dews, and from the silken gem 
Its lucid leaves unfolds ; for him the hand 
Of autumn tinges eyery fertile branch 
With blooming gold, and blushes like the mom." 

Thus an infinitely |3enefieent Creator has made 

**A11 nature beauty to the eye and music to the ear." 

Is one weary and worn with toil and care? 
Let him survey the varied beauties of the land- 
scape ; let him listen to the lulling music of the 
waterfall, or the sweet strains of the songsters 
of the grove ; how is he refreshed, and what 
delightful emotions fill his soul. Nor does the 
influence cease when the cause is removed: 



y Google 



221 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

''For the attentiYe mind ^ 
Bj this harmonionB action on her powers. 
Becomes heraelf harmonions." 

In beholding th^ order of the varied objects of 
creation, a kindred order is produced within ; 
and thus, 

** The tempered powers 
Beflne at length, and every passion wears 
A chaster, milder, more attraddye mien." 

Nor is it from the objects of nature alone 
that man is capable of receiving pleasure. So 
wonderfully formed, endued with genius as 
well as taste, by this creative energy he is 
enabled to produce imitations and symbolical 
representations that i&ll the soul with delight. 
Here we are introduced to a consideration of 
the fine arts, or those arts the design of which 
is to give pleasure, as sculpture, architecture, 
painting, poetry, and music, the last three oc- 
cupying a prominent place. Poetry, you per- 
ceive, is one of these sources of enjoyment to a 
person of cultivated mind. Not only in itself, 
but combined with music, it furnishes a pleas- 
ure elevated and refining, filling the soul with 
delightful emotions. 

It is. by the exercise of the higher powers 
that we become susceptible of these pleasures 
of taste, capable of receiving delight from scenes 



by Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 225 

in nature beantifol and sublime, or from repre- 
sentations of these scenes; '^for the rational 
soul, not the animal, can be touched with beauty 
and roused by sublimity." The mind in vigor- 
ous exercise catches the sentiment expressed 
by the visions and voices that meet the eye 
and the ear, and thus has access to sources of 
pleasure unknown to those whose enjoyment 
is derived from mere animal gratification. 

It is not therefore surprising that the igno- 
rant and sensual feel little interest in the finest 
productions of human genius, and that the 
amusements they most relish are frivolous, or 
such as excite and gratify the animal nature. 
How little charm to a devotee of sensual pleas- 
ure in views of natural scenery, such, for in- 
stance, as the splendor of the starry heavens, * 
the delicate shades in the evening sky as the 
great orb of day sinks to rest, the verdant car- 
pet on which he walks, where flowers are scat- 
tered in rich profusion, the rivulet dancing over 
its pebbly bottom and winding its way through 
the deepening green of the rich meadows. Man 
is formed capable of enjoying scenes like these, 
if he cultivate the higher powers which his 
Creator has bestowed upon him ; but if he live 
merely for the gratification of his animal na- 

10* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



286 TOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

tare, his pleasures are scarcely higher than 
those of animals destitute of reason. 

The poet is one* who is feelingly alive to all 
the beauties of nature and of art. ** We might 
all be poets," says Carlyle, *4f we could see 
deep enough ;" for beauty is everywhere, and 
when it is perceived, the soul is so attuned to 
harmony that the language flows in mellifluous 
strains. The imagination, under the influence 
of this tide of emotion, culls the beautiful ob- 
jects that everywhere meet the view, and com- 
bines them into scenes and images that fill the 
beholder with delight. There is a sweet sym- 
pathy among those who feel these emotions, 
and hence an increased pleasure in the inter- 
change of the social affections. Thus, by the 
cultivation of this higher nature, the feelings are 
refined, and the sphere of human enjoyment 
enlarged and elevated. 

Again, as all our powers are improved by 
exercise, familiarity with beautiful scenes in 
nature, or the representations of these, scenes 
in the fine arts, must increase the power of re- 
ceiving pleasure. Reading poetry then, or de- 
scriptions by one under the influence of this 
gushing tide of emotion, his conceptions of the 
Vautiful and sublime so vivid that he traces, in 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



TOUKG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 297 

xaeasured numbers, ''thoughts that breathe and 
words that bum" — this must move the feelings 
of the reader, and introduce him to a sphere 
of the highest enjoyment. Poetry therefore, 
"being one of the varied sources of delight which 
lie open to a cultivated mind, I would suggest 
to the ladies of your circle, that they avail 
themsehres of their opportunity to quaff rich 
draughts from this fountain of pleasure. They 
will thus enjoy a recreation by which the mind 
will be refreshed and invigorated, and enabled 
to engage with renewed ardor in life's varied 
labors and duties. 

I have spoken particularly of one of the 
fine arts, poetry, because upon this you re- 
quested my thoughts ; but an attention to any 
of these arts will furnish a pleasure grateful to 
a person of delicate sensibility, and an improv- 
ed understanding. The taste is thus refined, 
asperity of manners softened, social feelings 
strengthened, and the sources of enjoyment 
much enlarged. It is also to me an interesting 
thought, that from the sympathy between the 
aesthetic and moral nature of man, a correct 
taste considers nothing beautiful that is not 
pure. 

Your sincere friend, j^ a 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



228 TOUNO LADT OF PLEASURE. 



LETTER XXIX. 

MY DEAE MISS STAl^LEY: 

I cannot well express the pleasure your 
letter aflforded me. I have received so many 
new ideas, and have so much to say im reply, 
that I hardly know where to begin. 

I am sure I never realized what a wonder- 
ful nature is this with which we are endowed. 
'As often as I have read the history of the crea- 
'tion, I never saw such a great diflference in the 
formation of man and brutes. AnimaU were 
created, and made to live ; but into man the . 
Almighty breathed the breath of life, and he 
became a living soul. It was the breath of the 
Creator that gave him this elevation of charac- 
ter, and made him an immortal being. Dr. 
Young says, 

" What strange extremes are centred in his make ! 
An heir of glory, a frail child of dust ; 
Helpless immortali insect in&iite ; 
Y A wonn, a god I" 

**How passing wonder" that«Being by whom 
he is so ** fearfully and wonderfully made." 

It is indeed easy, when we consider the two- 
fold nature of man, to account for the difference 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OT PLEASUJtS. 229 

discoverable in human character. The savage 
and the philosopher — ^how great the contrast ! 
It is education which makes the difference, or 
the cultivation of the higher nature instead of 
the lower. What a contrast also there some- 
times is among those who have the same ad- 
vantages ; some giving themselves up to an in- 
dulgence in sensual pleasures, while others are 
earnestly engaged in searching into the great 
principles of truth, by which the mind is ele- 
vated and enlarged. I can recollect those dis- 
tinguished for intellectual and moral attain- 
ments, and the undivided attention they gave 
to the discussion of important subjects ; while, 
in the same class, there would be others who 
took no interest in the recitation, showing very 
plainly by the expression of the countenance, 
and by their conversation at intervals, that 
their thoughts were occupied with some friv- 
olous kind of fan, or the anticipation of a favor- 
ite scheme of selfish gratification. I remember 
girls who left school because they could have 
** better things to eat at home f at least this is 
what they said, thus proving what they regard- 
ed as of most consequence. Those parents 
who send boxes of cake, candy, and other de- 
licious things to their children, are helping 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



aaO YOPNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

them to cultivate their lower nature, while 
ihey place quite an obstacle in the way of ad- 
vances of a more elevated character. Also 
those who bring up their little ones so that 
from infancy they are devoted to dress and 
excitixig pleasures, are surely hindering their 
mental improvement. 

The amusements most relished must be an 
index of the character, for thus we can dis- 
cover whether the sensual or the spiritual na- 
ture is most fully developed. I do not think 
a person of lofty conceptions and refined taste 
could enjoy indeGcate, vulgar, or frivolous 

recreations. The conversation too must be a 

* 

pretty certain mark to judge by; for those 
who are most interested in talking about dress 
and ornaments, their admirers, and the com- 
pliments they have received, cannot have any 
great strength of intellect or elevation of mind, 
though they may be in the Senior class, or may 
even have graduated. 

A thought that you used often to impress 
upon us seems now so full of truth, that I won- 
der I have not been more sensible of it before. 
It is this, that education is our own work ; that 
teachers and parents are helpers, but that no 
one can perform the labor for us. I see plainly 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 281 

the impossibility of acquiring intellectaal supe- 
riority unless one exercises her own mind, and 
overcomes the difficulties she meets by her own 
efforts. I hope, although I have left school, 
and no longer pursue a systematic course of 
study, that I shall make it a daily -business to 
cultivate my spiritual nature, growing wiser 
and better as life wears away. 

We were all delighted with your thoughts 
on poetry, and quite convinced that, to a per- 
son of cultivated mind, it must be a great source 
of pleasure to explore these creations of genius. 
The tendency of this branch of the fine arts to 
improve the taste, and to ftirnish elevated en- 
joyment, seemed rather a new idea to some ; I 
suppose because it had received so little atten- 
tion. 

Those quotations that you gave us were 
beautifal. I knew the first was from Young, 
and having found it, I read some pages in that 
part of the book. The other I could not find, 
and I wish you would tell us the author. 
** Night Thoughts" furnished the reading for 
the rest of the afternoon, as the ladies were 
so much pleased with it, that they preferred 
to put aside what had been selected. Miss 
Macy was our reader, and she performed her 

Digitized by CjOOQIC 



232 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

part 80 well that it added greatly to our 
pleasure. 

After reading what Dr. Young says on con- 
versation, we had an amusing time. We con- 
cluded that if "thoughts shut up" were in dan- 
ger of spoiling, we would pour ours out to the 
sun as fast as we could, though some were afraid 
their thoughts would ''come forth dross," and 
not gold. However, it was the general decis- 
ion that if " speech ventilates our intellectual 
fire,"- and ** burnishes our mental magazine," 
we had better exercise our conversational pow- 
ers, and thus increase the number and force of 
our ideas. I am sure the reading of such poe- 
try as that of Dr. Young affords both improve- 
ment and delight, and we all realized it to be 
a recreation of an elevated character. 

I perceive from your letter that you ap- 
prove of attending to the ornamental branches, 
but I had always supposed you thought that 
in this way a. good deal of time was wasted. 
Do you think a person's taste can be culti- 
vated without attending to some one or more 
of the fine arts ? 

We hardly knew what to think of your last 
suggestion, that nothing is beautiful unless it is 
pore. If you mean moral beauty^ I think I 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 233 

tmderstand you, for no one, I suppose, sees 
any real beauty in vice. There are, however, 
some poets who have written what is univer- 
sally admired, and who yet were much given 
to low and sensual pleasures ; as, for instance, 
Bobert Burns and Tom Moore. Miss Macy's 
idea was, that indulgence in vice does not de- 
stroy the taste ; and that beauty can be per- 
ceived in external objects, or in what is really 
"beautiful, while the person sees that in himself 
from which he can receive no pleasure. My 
thought was, that with our depraved hearts we 
are prone to call good evil, and evil good ; and 
therefore, that what is really evil in the sight 
of God, may to some appear beautiful. Thus 
ambition ha^ been considered noble, and pride 
praiseworthy ; but whatever is regarded as evil 
cannot be admired. 

I have somewhere met with this remark : 
'*True refinement of mind is always attended 
with a perception and love of fitness and pro- 
priety, as well as of beauty and sublimity." 
Thfere may be beauty and sublimity in the soul 
or higher n&ture, as well as in external objects. 
'* Genius," I recollect I once learned, **is moral 
sublimity ; love, compassion, and other virtues, 
moral beauty; and the perfection of goodness 



y Google 



S34 YOUHO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

or beaoty, and of greatness or snblimity, in 
the hi^est degree of which we can conceive, 
is exhibited in the character of the supreme 
Being." 

I have written yon a longer letter than 
nsnal, but I am indebted to yon for many of 
the thonghts. 

Your 

MAK T A, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 236 



. LETTER XXX. 

MYDEABMAKIA: 

In my last I intended to have spoken more 
particularly of an ornamental education. I 
approve of as much attention to the fine arts 
as may be without encroaching upon the time 
that should be devoted to the solid branches, 
or as is consistent with the circumstances of 
the person. The pecuniary means must give 
some direction to the course that should be 
pursued. Some parents can aflford to send 
their daughters to a seminary for years, others 
but for a few quarters. It is absurd for one 
who knows she can spend but a few months at 
school, to attempt what it would take years to 
acquire. The wise course would be to attend 
to that which is most necessary and useful. 
Reading, writing, and spelling, are accomplish- 
ments every one should possess, but in which 
many, who have spent much time upon the 
ornamental branches, are very deficient. 

It should be kept in mind, that the practical 
purpose for which most females acquire a know- 
ledge of the fine arts is, to furnish them with 



y Google 



S36 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

recreations agreeable and refined, and not to 
prepare them for the business of life. The 
object in the education of woman should be 
kept in view — to fit her for the sphere which 
she must occupy as daughter, sister, wife, 
mother, and mistress of a &mUy — a teacher in 
every station, but not an artist An attention 
to the ornamental branches should not there- 
fore interfere with the acquisition of those nec- 
essary to strengthen the reasoning powers, and 
to fit her for the performance of the duties of 
her station in life ; still, as the fine arts tend 
to the improvement of the taste, by the exer- 
cise of which she can render home attractive, 
giving a charm to its quiet scenes, it is not well 
that they should be neglected. All her powers 
must be cultivated, that she may have a well- 
balanced mind ; and that she may be fitted to 
brighten her home on earth, as well as pre- 
pared for a blessed home in heaven, her whole 
character must be imbued with the innuence 
of the gospel. 

In deciding to which of the fine arts the 
attention should be given, the one most con- 
genial or most suitable, considering the cir- 
cumstances of the person, should be selected. 
Much time is wasted by young ladies in at- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 287 

tempting to acquire that for which they have 
no natural ability, and from which they derive 
so little pleasure that it is soon laid aside. This 
is unwise ; but as many have no other guide 
than the course pursued by others, a branch 
most fashionable is selected as the one which 
the young lady must be taught, although, as 
the teacher very soon discovers, it is the one 
that she never will learn. 

I have had pupils who conld not read un- 
derstandingly to themselves, nor intelligibly to 
others, devoting a large portion of the short 
period they were at school to an attempt to 
learn instrumental music; of course gaining 
nothing by it in any respect beneficial to them- 
selves or others. 

You. realize ho.w desirable an accomplish- 
ment good reading is in your circle, of which 
you had an illustration in Miss Macy's reading 
of Young. I wish this was more common ; but 
in a large circle it is sometimes difficult to find 
one who feels competent, or who is really com- 
petent, to read so as to give pleasure to those 
who listen. The fact that many think more of 
being able to drum on the piano than to read 
and spell correctly, has, I presume, led me 
to speak of learning this ornamental branch 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



288 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

in such a manner that yoa thoaght I disap- 
proved of it. I certainly think it a waste of 
time and money for some to take lessons in 
music. If the time thus consumed were spent 
in hard study, or if the money paid for the 
instrument and the lessons were used to ena- 
ble the pupil to remain at school, it would pro- 
duce a great change for the better in. the edu- 
cation of our sex. 

Similar results are seen in attempts at 
drawing. A young lady is required to take 
lessons, as it is thought important for her to 
have all the fashionable accomplishments ; but 
she has little perception of beauty, and no skill 
in imitation; her figures therefore are awk- 
ward and clumsy, and her tints and shading 
miserable. This must be the case, unless the 
teacher perform the work, while it passes for 
that of the pupil. This is often done, either 
to avoid the dissatisfaction of the parents, or 
from an unwillingness that such performances 
should leave one's school. 

From what I have written, I would not 
have you infer that I think little of these orna- 
mental arts. They furnish recreation adapted 
to refresh and exhilarate a cultivated mind, 
and they should take the place of amusements 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 239 

that are trifling and injarions to the char- 
acter. 

The nse of the pencil is an accomplishment 
very desii^ble to be attained. To sketch beau- 
tifol scenes, and to trace the forms and shading 
true to nature, is a source of great pleasure, and 
has a refining influence upon the mind. It is 
an amusement that can be enjoyed in retire- 
ment, or when deprived of social intercourse. 
And not only the productions of the pencil, 
but ornamental work performed by the needle 
improves the taste, and increases the attrac- 
4;ions of home. 

Music is a heavenly art, and by its influ- 
ence the soul is refreshed, exhilarated, and 
lifted above the grovelling things of earth. 
How is the toil-worn husband or father cheer- 
ed when, at the close of the day, he is greeted 
by the sweet . minstrelsy of the loved one&, 
whose profession it is to study household good ; 
and what joy lights up their souls as, ere they 
bow before the mercy-seat, they unite in a song 
of praise and thanksgiving to the bounteous 
Giver of all the blessings they enjoy. My ex- 
perience leads me to judge that a knowledge 
of vocal music is of more importance than of 
Instrumental. The voice seems indispensable 



y Google 



240 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

in pouring forth the gushing emotions of the 
soul, though its power is increased by an instru- 
ment. There is great deligtt in the expres- 
sion of these emotions ; and in listening, one 
seems to drink in the soul-stirring strains, and 
hearts blend one with the other in delightful 
unison. To chant the simple lay with those 
whose feelings mingle with our own, gives 
sweet pleasure ; but to join with the great 
congregation in the solemn hymn of praise, 
affords a more elevated joy, and seems to bear 
us to the very gates of heaven. 

I have observed that those who are accus-* * 
tomed to sing with an instrument seem quite 
unable to unite in vocal music without this 
accompaniment, probably because they do not 
become independent singers; and it seems to 
me, if this is a necessary consequence, they 
had better accustom themselvea to use the vo- 
cal organs without its aid. 

While on this subject, I would remind you 
of the danger of having the mind dissipated by 
songs that are low and foolish. We cannot be 
too careful to avoid this influence, for' there is 
great power in music and poetry combined. 
We should not read prose that gives us wrong 
thoughts, much less poetry; but especially 



y Google 



YOUNG LAI>Y OF PLEASUBE. 241 

should we beware of low ideas brought into 
the mind under the combined influence of po- 
etry and music. 

Here I would notice a common error among 
Christians. It seems to be an opinion, that in 
the choice of recreations one's own inclination 
may be followed, without regard to the influ- 
ence on others, or even on one's self. Why 
do you indulge in that amusement ? we inquire 
of one. Simply because it pleases me, is with 
many an all-sufficient reason. Suppose it is 
urged that its influence is not good ; the reply 
is, **It does not do me any harm." This, how- 
ever, is said apparently vithout thought of its 
eflFect upon one's self or others. But the rule 
of the apostle is, '* Whether therefore ye eat 
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the 
glory of Crod ;" and this evidently in reference 
to what are sources of enjoyment. When scenes 
of pleasure open before us, how clearly is it 
our duty to inquire whether in this indulgence 
we act for the glory of God, and whether by 
this means we shall become so much refreshed 
as to increase our power of doing good. 

Is one invited to a fashionable assembly? 
What reason induces her to accept the invita- 
tion ? Is it becau&e her physical, intellectual, 
11 

Digitized by LrrOOQ IC 



242 YOUNO LADY OF PLEASUEB. 

or moral powers will thus be invigorated, ren- 
dering her better fitted for the discharge of 
doty ; or that her social and benevolent feel- 
ings will be strengthened, and she thus be led 
to take a deeper interest in promoting the hap- 
piness of others ? Is the principle that regu- 
lates the decision, the desire to promote the 
good of her fellow-beings and the glory of her 
divine Redeemer? Those accustomed to ac- 
cept such invitations are the persons to reply. 

It is our duty to cultivate the habit of social 
intercourse, not only in the home circle, but in 
the neighborhood or community in which we 
reside. I was pleased with a little piece which 
I saw not long since on parties. The idea ad- 
vanced was, that they should be "more frequent, 
but less expensive." The directions, however, 
are all so good, that I must quote it for the 
benefit of yourself and your circle : 

"The company should assemble early in 
the evening, and disperse early, allowing time 
for family duties and a full night's rest. They 
should embrace the aged and the young in the 
same assemblage. They should be such that 
true Christians could be there with a good con- 
science. They should not be very large, and 
the amusements should combine improvement 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 248 

in something valuable, with the hilarity which 
contributes to health and happiness." 

If the people of God realized their obliga- 
tions in regard to amusements, and that they 
have a duty to perform in devising such rec- 
reations as are beneficial as well as agreeable, 
I think there would be a great change in the 
character of society. Christians have too long 
left this for the world to direct ; and while some 
have seen the inconsistency of mingling in fiwh- 
ionable assemblies, others have entered into 
the plans devised by the gay, giving as a rea- 
son what is really true, that we are social be- 
ings, and that some kind of recreation is nec- 
essary. 

Fashionable parties do not tend to promote 
social intercourse, and they check the progress 
of intellectual and religious improvement. The 
late hours, great display, and manner of spend- 
ing the time, render it inconsistent for Chris- 
tians to give countenance to these scenes of 
vanity and dissipation. Social pleasures with- 
out these attending evils should be encouraged. 

Your reading circle is an instance of one 
of the methods by which these pleasures can 
be enjoyed without any evil results. Sewing 
societies for benevolent purposes are another ; 



y Google 



341 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

and I think these social meetings might be ren- 
dered more improving, if there could be read- 
ing daring portions of the time, if not for the 
whole afternoon. A higher tone would thus 
be given to the conversation, and gossip, 
talking of one^s neighbors and discussing the 
faults of servants, might be prevented. The 
object for which persons are employing their 
needles should be well understood, and every 
such circle might be a ''society for inquiry" 
in regard to what is being done for the benefit 
of the world. 

In a village where I am acquainted, on the 
evening after the sewing society, there is what 
is called a sociable. The members of the soci- 
ety, as well as others, meet at some place which 
is designated, the minister and other gentlemen 
being present, and the season is spent in a 
social manner. There are certain regulations, 
as that each one shall deposit a small sum to 
promote the benevolent object for which they 
are engaged; that there shall be no refresh- 
ments, and that the company shall retire at a 
seasonable hour ; the evening being invariably 
closed with prayer. A happy influence is thus 
exerted. There is social enjoyment among 
persons of different sexes, ages, and conditions 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 246 

in Kfe, without the evils attending fashionable 
parties ; the cause of benevolence is promoted, 
and Grod is honored. 

I had thought of some su^estions on gar- 
dening, a branch of the fine arts accessible to 
almost all ; a source of pleasure that may be 
enjoyed in some degree even by those who are 
in poverty, for the poor seamstress who has 
not one foot of ground may yet have roses 
blooming in her window. Every woman may 
enjoy this pleasure ; her dwelling may be em- 
bowered in flowers, and rendered paradisiacal 
by those beautiful objects' that delight the taste 
and ravish the senses. 

I have a friend, a widow with poor health 
and small pecuniary means, whose dwelling, a 
home of^efinement and love, is embosomed in' 
flowers of her own rearing. Her tiny yard, 
so tastefully adorned, blooms from the opening 
spring till the frosts of autumn; and then 
her dwelling shelters the tender exotics, which 
cheer by their fragrance and beauty through 
the bleak and stormy days of winter. This 
continual bloom is an apt emblem of her deeds 
of love, and of her truly Christian spirit, which 
seeks to bless all who come within the sphere 
of her influence. 



y Google 



346 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

No one of the fine arts has a happier ten- 
dency, more refines the mind and improves the 
taste, than the cultivation of flowers. " It pro- 
motes health, and calls into exercise the best 
feelings of onr nature. This widow, without a 
knowledge of music, painting, or any other of 
the fine arts than gardening, is more distin* 
guished for delicacy and refinement than many 
who have spent years in acquiring an orna- 
mental education. We may therefore infer, 
that for the improvement of the taste, it is not 
necessary to attend to a particular branch of 
the fine arts, or one that happens to be most 
fashionable ; but that by a simple means all may 
cultivate this power of receiving pleasure, and 
thus have a recreation which is at once delicate 
and exhilarating. Though one cann#t make 
the canvas glow with life -and beauty, nor by a 
touch shake out a " treasure- of sweet sounds" 
from many a ** trembling chord," yet nature is 
to her full of music ; and beautiful objects, ev- 
erywhere scattered in rich profusion, delight 
the eye. From these the person of cultivated 
mind may cull those that most please the taste, 
and imagination may combine them so as to 
form one beauteous whole, ** disposing well the 
gay diversities of leaf and flower f thus Bhow- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 247 

ing that the grace the garden exhibits is the 
"creature of a polished mind," What a charm 
may thus be thrown around the spot to all 
most dear; and what place more delightful, 
where, with "friends, books, her garden, and 
perhaps her pen," one may possess sources of 
enjoyment pure and ennobling. 

This refinement of feeling so happily adapt- 
ed to increase our social pleasures, may be 
exhibited In all the departments of life, and by 
ten thousand little acts of love may render this 
transitory state a period bright and joyous. 
Taste, as the handmaid of religion, or moved 
by a spirit of love, sprinkles the pathway with 
flowers, and adds to the pleasure of all who 
come within her influence. However humble 
the cottage, this nice perception of beauty can 
be seen in the neatness and orderly arrange- 
ment of the various articles essential to house- 
hold comfort, as well as in the dress and man- 
ners ; not in the profusion and display of rich 
furniture and ornamental attire, but in a chaste 
and beautiful simplicity, and a nice attention 
to what is congruous and proper. A woman of 
correct taste is not decked with a profusion of 
ornaments, nor does she follow fashions that 
are inconsistent with true delicacy. Even the 



itized by Google 



848 TOrNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

tones of her voice and the movements of her 
body, as well as the expression of her connte- 
nance, evince the benevolence of her heart and 
her desire that others may be happy. There 
is no affectation of gentility, a species of polite- 
ness pnt on in company and laid aside at 
home, but an exhibition of the geniiine spirit 
of kindness at all times and in all places, and 
towards persons of all ranks and conditions in 
life. 

Studying to render every thing agreeable 
to those with whom we are associated, increases 
the social feelings ; and our Creator has so form- 
ed us, that in blessing others we ourselves are 
blessed. Those who seek only to please them- 
selves, are themselves most ignorant of enjoy- 
ment. Many are the methods of beautifying 
one's home, and of increasing the sources of 
pleasure in this dear spot, but it is love that 
gives brightness to the scene. Whatever has 
a tendency to refine the feelings and bring into 
exercise the social affections, is happy in its 
influence. The wortd is fiill of beauty, and 
from the different kingdoms of nature, as well 
as from the creations of human genius, objects 
pleasing to the taste may be selected to adorn 
the spot to all most dear. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 249 

A friend of mine residing in a city has in 
this way added much to the pleasure of his 
family as well as his own enjoyment. He has 
a little greenhouse with a choice collection of 
exotics ; and in addition to the flowers, which 
charm by their beauty and fragrance, there is 
an aquarium well supplied with various speci- 
mens of the finny tribe, which, by their easy 
and continual motion gliding through their 
native element, furnish a spectacle so agree- 
able, that one hardly tires of gazing upon it. 
At the same time a little fountain scatters a 
tiny shower, while the v sweet warbling of the 
canaries heightens the enjoyment, and one is 
led to feel a mingling of delightful emotions. 
There is a soothing and cheerful influence pro- 
duced by these varied sources of pleasure, fur- 
nishing a recreation to those who are wearied 
with toil and care, as well as to the gay and 
light-hearted children. As the character re- 
ceives an impress from scenes with which one 
is familiar, such a collection of beautiful objects 
has a tendency to refine the mind, soothe the 
passions, and increase the social affections. 
How great the contrast between such pleasures 
and those of display and parade, which, giving 
exercise to vanity and rivalry, produce a spirit 
11* 

Digitized byCjOQQlC 



360 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

of discontent, of contention, and a disregard for 
the rights and happiness of others. 

How happy the home in which love ever 
presides, and how happy those who are minis- 
tering spirits to the desir ones with whom they 
are pursaing the journey of life ; not forgetting 
to care for those less highly favored than them* 
selves, while with hearts of gratitude they 
receive all these blessings as gifts from their 
heavenly Father's hand. They may be "poor 
perhaps, compared with those whose mansions 
glitter in their sight," yet "as they look abroad 
upon the varied field of nature," all the de- 
lightful scenery is theirs to ^njoy, and with it 
a heart of grateful love. 

"Domestic happmees, thon aulj blias 
Of Fazadiae, that has sorviTed the fall ; 
Thou art the nurse of yirtae ; in thine arms 
She smiles, appearing, as in tmth she is, 
Hearen-bom, and destined to the skies again." 

The inmates of such a home, if indeed the 
children of God, not only have here much to 
enjoy, they are ravished with glimpses of their 
heavenly home, that city with "gates of pearl " 
and "streets of gold," and its light the "glory- 
of God." They love to think of this blissful 
abode where there is no more sin, and where 
ihey shall meet the loved ones who have gone 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 261 

before ; where they shall unite with all the re- 
deemed in a ceaseless song of praise to Him 
who has purchased their salvation with his own 
blood, and where He who is their **hope of 
heaven below," will for ever be *'the glory of 
their heaven above." That we, dear Maria, 
may there meet, prays 

Your aflFectionate 

M. s. 
P. S. The quotation for which you inquire 
is in Akenside's Pleasures of the Imagination. 



D^itized by 



Google 



SSa YOUNQ LADY OF PLEASUBE. 



LETTER XXXI. 

UT.DEAB FRIEND: 

As usual yonr letter furnishes me with 
many thoughts which it is pleasant to arrange 
and fix in my mind. I feel more and more the 
importance of what you have sought to impress 
on me, that we know nothing as we ought to 
know, without reflection. 

Your remarks about the waste of time in 
learning music occasioned quite a little excite- 
ment in our circle. *'How true that is," was 
echoed round the room. Some indeed blushed, 
saying, **How much time I have thus lost." 
Miss Dole said she knew a young lady who, 
after taking lessons two years, could only play 
''Little Bo-peep." 

There is an equal absurdity too in some 
girls attempting the use of the pencil, for it 
would seem even more impossible, without 
taste, to learn painting than music. I could 
not help thinking of the young lady who pur- 
chased a piece executed by one of her com- 
panions, and took it home as her own work. 

We were delighted with your remarks upon 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEAStJBE. 268 

the cultivation of flowers. I had studied the 
chapter in Karnes on Grardening, still I never 
.thought about its being one of the fine arts; 
but when I reflect, I see the propriety of its 
being so considered, for it is the selection and 
arrangement of beautiful objects with the de- 
sign to please or to gratify the taste. I have 
taken great pleasure in the cultivation of flow- 
ers, but I have never had any exotics. I 
should like to be acquainted with that friend 
of yours who has such delight in gardening as 
well as in doing good. I should also take 
pleasure in being introduced to that beautiful 
greenhouse and aquarium. I believe all our 
circle resolved to engage in the cultivation of 
flowers. I think we shall be quite inexcusable 
if we do not beautify our homes, not externally 
alone, but that in the order and beauty every- 
where seen, our taste and industry should be 
apparent ; while our cheerful countenances, 
kind words, and obliging actions, produce a 
continual sunshine. 

Miss Wilcox reque^sted that the reading 
circle might meet at her father's next week, 
as she has some geraniums and roses in bloom 
that she is sure it will give us pleasure to see 
in this cold and blustering season. She also 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



S64 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

promised slips to those who are ready to en- 
gage at once in the culture of plants, You 
perceive therefore that your su^estions receive 
immediate attention. I hope we shall be as 
ready to cultivate a cheerful and kind disposi- 
tion as to cultivate flowers, that thus we may 
diffuse around us a bright and cheering influ- 
ence. We had a very pleasant conversation 
on this subject. In addition to your letter, we 
read the chapter in Mrs. Ellis' "Daughters of 
England," on ** Taste, Tact, and Observation/' 
I recollected being delighted with this chapter 
when you referred us to it in the Practical 
Knowledge Class, and particularly with her 
remarks upon taste as the handmaid of relig- 
ion> or under the influence of the law of love. 
You used to tell us that if the taste is not cul- 
tivated when young, it is impossible to efface 
the coarseness .which will be in the character; 
and that there will always seem in such a per- 
son a lack of refinement and delicacy. I should 
think, if parents were aware of this, they would 
be particular in regard to the companions with 
whom their children associate, and the habits 
which they form when young. What a happy 
world would this be if, as God requires, love 
and not selfishness were ihe ruling principle c^ 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 266 

action — supreme love to Qod, and love to our 
neighbor as ourselves. 

A remark of Mrs. Ellis seems very strik- 
ing: that as the aflfections in woman are stron- 
ger than in man, when her love is not drawn 
out towards others, she expends it all on her- 
self, her selfishness thus becoming very prom- 
inent. This may help us to account for the 
fact, that when a woman is noted for wicked- 
ness, she seems to be more depraved than a 
man the most degraded and vile. How im- 
portant that we cultivate right affections, and 
form such a character as will render us bless- 
ings to the world in which we live, and that 
we use our exalted privileges and the tal- 
ents we possess, in doing good to our fellow- 
beings, and in promoting the glory of our 
divine Redeemer. 

We have come to this resolution in our 
reading circle : that at each meeting we will 
have a report of the one preceding, of what 
we read, what was the subject of your letter, 
what thoughts were suggested by the reading, 
or what remarks were made in the conversa- 
tion that followed, and that we will take turns 
alphabetically in writing these reports. This 
is a good introduction to the writing of essays, 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



266 YOUNG LADY O*' FLEASUBE. 

and a paper. I presume in due time these 
desirable results will follow. Composition, I 
think, seems much less of a hydra than it did. 
We have all had our abstract>-books some time, 
to which we frequently refer in our conversa- 
tions. We now dare to talk about writing for 
the circle, and I have consented to read, the 
letters I write to you. I shall begin with this. 

Miss M was quite surprised that her 

reading was noticed with so much approbation. 
She seemed to have had no thought that it was 
any thing more than common. We told her that 
was one reason why it was so pleasant to hear 
her read ; it was evident she had no idea of 
exhibiting herself. I think good reading a fine 
accomplishment, and there is as much beauty 
in the tones of the voice and clearness of enun- 
ciation, as in the proper emphasis and cadence. 

I have been thinking that, with a world so 
full of beauty, and with so many avenues to 
pleasure as a benevolent Creator has opened 
to us, how inconsistent it is to devise methods 
of amusement which are a hinderance to our 
intellectutil and moral development— methods 
which lead to a violation of His righteous 
commands, and a contempt of his offers of 
love. We may look abroad upon the varied 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 267 

field of nature, and taste the sweets that are 
everywhere strewed around us. We may se- 
lect objects that delight the taste, and embel- 
lish the spot to us most dear. With the pen- 
cil we may transfer scenes sketched by masters 
of art, and with them may adorn our homes. 
We may behold the varied exhibitions of hu- 
man genius. We may listen to the sweet har- 
monies of nature; and as "there is in souls a 
sympathy with sound, some chord in unison 
with what we hear may be touched within us," 
and the soul be filled with delight. We may be- 
come acquainted with' the divine art of music, 
and not only listen, but unite in swelling melo- 
dious strains. With the poet too, whose heart 
is ravished by these beautiful sights and sounds, 
and who pours forth his deep-gushing emotions 
in measured numbers and with soul-stirring 
pathos, we can hold converse, and with him 
drink in large draughts of joy. 

Your remarks upon our accountability to 
God for the manner in which we spend our 
hours of relaxation, were aflfecting to us all. 
We know that we ^must give an account to 
God for all our thoughts, words, and deeds; 
and yet how little we think of it. That in our 
amusements we should act for the glory of 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



9BB TOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

God and for the good of our fellow-beings, as 
well as for oar own pleasure, seems not to enter 
the mind* I think with you, that good people 
do not sufficiently consider what amusements 
are proper and right I believe some young 
people receive the impression that their Chris- 
tian friends look upon all amusements as wick- 
ed; and I do not know but they sometimes 
have reason for this idea. That quotation 
about parties is admirable, showing just what 
they should be ; and such scenes of social inter- 
course would be delightful. I think our read- 
ing circle a fine recreation. We do not desire 
any other, and dancing parties have quite died 
away here, as almost all the young ladies are 
members of our circle. As you say, it seems 
to me sewing societies should be reading socie- 
ties, or societies for inquiry. This would ren- 
der them a means of improvement as well as 
of pleasure. I wish you would tell me what 
you think of writing poetry. Some of our circle 
also wish me to ask you to give your thoughts 
.on games ot chance. 

Your own 

MABIA 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 269 



LETTER XXXII. 

MY DEAB MABIA: 

Much satisfaction do I receive in becoming 
acquainted with the progress ^ou are making 
in your reading circle. For this there are two 
reasons : your own advancement in what affords 
profit and delight, and the hope that others 
may be induced by your example to engage in 
this means of enjoyments How exceedingly 
desirable that associations of a similar charac- 
ter should take the place of assemblies where 
the time is given up to dancing or foolish plays 
until a late hour in the night, and when, if 
there is conversation, the topics that most 
interest the company are the faults and fail- 
ings of their neighbors, or the all-absorbing 
themes of dress and fashion. A great saving 
of expenditure might thus be attained, a mat- 
ter of some importance, especially if the money 
thus saved could be applied to the relief of the 
distressed. This reminds me of your efforts 
for the poot, and I would like to inquire in 
what benevolent purpose you are now en- 
gaged. 



y Google 



900 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

You ask, dear Maria, what I think of try- 
ing to write poetry. I have been anticipating 
this question, as it is suggested by a consider- 
ation of the fine arts. I can very readily reply, 
that I do not think it well to try to record 
scanty thoughts in rhyme; but the course I 
should advise is, to seek to increase their rich- 
ness and variety, and then to express them in 
a manner most easy and natural. That one 
may write with force and beauty, the mind 
must be stored with knowledge, and the emo- 
tions brought into vigorous action. The more 
deeply one feels, the more easy and flowing is 
the expression. 

Carlyle says, ** A vein of poetry exists in 
the hearts of all men," and poetry he calls 
*' musical thought." '' The heart of nature be- 
ing everywhere music, if we see deep enough, 
we shall see musically ;" that is, we shall reach 
the ** melody that in every thing lies hidden." 
Again he says, **It is only when the soul is 
rapt with her true passion of melody, and there 
* is greatness, depth, and mustc in the thoughts, 
that one has a right to rhyme." This is what 
-is sometimes termed a "divine afflatus," when 
** the soul enters into a freer, mightier, more 
intense life ; the reason clear, the imagination 



y Google 



YOUNO LADY OP PLEASUBE. 261 

all alive with bold and beautifal imagery, and 
glorious words come sparkling, leaping, thun- 
dering forth," This state of mind cannot, how- 
ever, be imitated or assumed ; it must be felt. 
A person possessing this power would be 
termed a genius, and' thought to be moved by 
a sort of inspiration. 

"At thy magic tonch, the rough marble gleams 
Into ecstatic shapes, and breathes and hves ; 
'T is thou whom the artist's waking dreams 

The light of glory to the canvas gives ; 
The poet too doth catch thy sparkling glow, 
And strews with stars our darksome path below." 

In reading this stanza, how many heroes of 
the fine arts are brought before us. Raphael, 
Mozart, Milton, and a host of others keenly 
alive to the beautiful and sublime, impress 
these qualities in living colors on all their 
works; multiplying and combining those ob- 
jects that delight the taste, and brightening 
man's pathway through this world of time. All 
do not, it is certain, possess this wonderful 
creative power. If any one sees deep enough, 
he would thus be moved; but as there is a 
diversity in the objects that give pleasure to 
taste, various would be the creations of those 
who feel this lofty inspiration. At the touch 
of Phidias, the marble seems almost to breathe ; 



y Google 



262 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

Raphael makes the canvas glow with life; 
while Jenny Lind, with her nightingale strains, 
thrills the soul with ecstacy; and Milton en- 
ables you to "alight amid the silver streams, 
the cooling shades, the ambrosial air of Para- 
dise, and to see what this* world would be were 
it not marred and clouded and blighted by 
sin." 

This ability to excel in some particular 
branch of the fine arts exhibits itself sometimes 
even in childhood; as of Pope it is said, **He 
lisped in numbers, for the numbers came ;" and 
Benjamin West, when a mere boy, executed 
such a picture of his little sister sleeping in her 
cradle, that his mother wept, and pressing him 
to her heart gave him the kiss which he says 
made him a painter. Even with little educa- 
tion some, as Amelia Welby, are distinguished 
for their poetic effusions. Of Mrs. Welby it is 
said, "Her melodies seemed the outgushings 
of her own nature, her song a simple melody, 
learned of the trill of the brooklet, the rustle 
of the leaves, or the deep solemn murmur of 
the ocean." Still, it is true that eminence is 
not often attained but by culture and educa- 
tion. Homer and Shakspeare, although the 
greatest names in literature ancient and mod* 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 263 

em, famish no argument against tie impor- 
tance of education, as they are exceptions, and 
what they might have been with superior ad- 
vantages we cannot divine. Jenny Lind, so 
illustrious an instance of musical genius, would 
probably never have been world-renowned for 
her power of song, but for her thorough train- 
ing in this science. You have heard it remark- 
ed, I presume, that those who are slow to learn 
sometimes attain the greater eminence. This 
is often true of authorship as well as acquiring 
a knowledge of the sciences; for those who 
apply themselves closely to the art of express- 
ing their thoughts, as well as to the cultiva- 
tion of their mental powers, often excel indo- 
lent ones, though these may have exhibited 
more genius in their first efforts. The mind 
strengthened by exercise, becomes enlarged; 
there is a greater grasp of thought, and the soul 
is moved by the grand and beautiful images 
there impressed. As scenes in nature are 
elevating and refining, so exhibitions of genius 
have a eorresponding influence, and arouse 
deep-gushing emotions, that are poured forth in 
strains beautiful and pathetic. 

There is a great work then to be performed. 
We mnst know, that we may feel; we must 



y Google 



264 YOUNQ LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

bring into action the exalted powers with which 
we are endowed ; we must grasp the treasures 
strewed everywhere in the world of mind — 
must catch the living sentiment in sense and 
sounds, and thus commune with the world with- 
out and the world within ; and more than this, 
we may catch the sentiment of the supernatu- 
ral, and everywhere read the uttered feelings 
of the infinite Creator of all things. The per- 
fections of the Deity are impressed upon all 
his works, and thus in adoring love our souls 
may be raised above this world, and our com- 
munion be with **Him in whom all fulness 
dwells." 

The mind thus enriched and disciplined, all 
the powers are in active operation, '* Attention 
fixes itself upon finished pictures in the con- 
ception, and memory brings her treasured re- 
sources. Association by one idea suggests 
others, while abstraction marks the essential 
differences, and examines each one singly. 
The mind turns back upon the passing train of 
thought, and by reflection attains a more com- 
plete conception; while the judgment com- 
parers these ideas, distinguishes between the 
real and the counterfeit, and infers new truths 
from premises already known. The imagina- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 266 

tion aroused, glances from earth to heaven, from 
heaven to earth, and bodies forth the form of 
things unknown," Reason inspires the love of 
truth, and reads the deep secrets of nature, 
while the aesthetic emotions, warmed into ac- 
tion by the insight of reason, respond in sym- 
pathy, and we feel the spirit within us kindred 
to that which is glowing all arouYid us. Like 
the diamond, "genius refracts and reflects the 
light it receives from other minds, and arranges 
ideas thus furnished so that the light of truth 
falls upon them with added lustre." With such 
a mind the language will be enriched with 
beautiful imagery, and will naturally flow in 
poetic measures, and be kindled with poetic fire. 
Now, dear Maria, is this an answer to your 
question? I think I see you smile, and I im- 
agine you are thinking I have more than an- 
swered it. However, I believe you are pleased 
with the reply, and are impressed with the im- 
portance of attaining these higher accomplish- 
ments. Although a great work, the means for 
its performance lie open before you, but ** there 
is no royal road" to its attainment; eflforts 
earnest and intense alone insure success. The 
gewgaws of fashion and of fancy must not ab- 
sorb the attention ; the mind must be closely 
12 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



266 YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 

exercised, and trained to high and noble em- 
ployments ; even the amusements must be such 
as are suited to a rational being, and in accord- 
ance with the dictates of an enlightened con- 
science. Our correspondence, I hope, has a 
happy influence in expanding your mind, in- 
creasing your thoughts, and in giving you 
facility of expression. Letter writing is an 
accomplishment very desirable to be attained, 
but it must not be idle gossip, like that often 
indulged in conversation. 

Tour reading circle will also aid you in 
this advancement, so long as you read books of 
a high moral and intellectual character. By 
carefully perusing authors of distinguished ex- 
cellence, your own mind will become stored 
with the richest treasures of thought, and you 
can hold a sort of communion with the gifted 
intellects of all ages. 

The book of nature too lies open before 
you, and. the more you study it the more will 
your mind be imbued with its beauty and sub- 
limity. By a familiar acquaintance with the 
works of the great Author of all things, not 
only is the taste refined,, but the soul is ele- 
vated and led from nature up to nature's God, 
the great Source of all perfection. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 267 

"The heavens declare the glory of God," 
and in all the objects of the visible creation we 
discover his wisdom, power, and love ; but by 
his blessed word we are introduced into the 
very presence-chamber of this infinitely glori- 
ous Being, are ravished with a foretaste of such 
things as **eye hath not seen, nor ear heard," 
"prepared for them that love Him," and are 
made acquainted with the wonderful method 
by which poor sinners can be transformed into 
his likeness, and inherit his glory. How are 
our souls exalted as we commune with proph- 
ets and apostles, and as we unite with them in 
ascriptions of praise and thanksgiving to the 
Triune God. 

Your friends it seems request my thoughts 
upon games of chance, but this I must defer till 
my next. 

Your affectionate friend, 

M. & 



y Google 



968 YOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 



ETTER XXXIII. 

MY DEAB FBIEND : 

Your letter was more than an answer to 
my question, but I was delighted with yonr 
suggestions respecting the means by which the 
mind may be enriched, and an advancement 
made towards that lofty height which our in- 
finitely benevolent Creator has made us capa- 
ble of attaining. 

After the reading of your letter to our circle 
of ladies, no one spoke for some minutes, while 
every countenance expressed deep feeling. 
Miss Cady was the first to break the silence 
by saying, "What a great work we have to 
perform ; or 3s I should say, it is our privilege 
to perform;" and says Miss Noble, "How 
thankful we ought to be to this dear friend, 
who has shown us the folly and sinfulness of 
giving ourselves up to trifling amusements, and 
has put us in the way of cultivating our higher 
powers." 

To this Miss Macy added, "How thankful 
to Him who has endowed us with such exalted 
powers, and although we have abused them, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PliEASUBE. 269 

and used them for our own selfish gratification, 
who has given ns this friend to remind us of 
our obligations." 

"But," says Miss Dole, "have we all con- 
secrated ourselves to the servic€t of this divine 
Being; and are we moved in all that we do by 
a desire to promote his glory?" 

This last inquiry seemed to produce a deep 
solemnity. We have reason to believe that 
the Spirit of Grod is striving with many of our 
number. Our prayer-meeting last Saturday 
evening was very solemn, and all of our circle 
were present. Miss Macy and Miss Dole have 
both expressed a hope of having become Chris- 
tians. You will remember us in your petitions 
at the throne of grace, and will join with us 
in ascriptions of praise for the merey drops 
that have fallen among us. What a glorious 
period this in which we live. I trust we are 
permitted to share in the blessing so abundant- 
ly poured out in various parts of our land. 
The morning prayer-meeting is held in our ' 
church, and attended by persons belonging to 
all the diflferent denominations. The meetings 
are deeply solemn and interesting. 

You wished me to tell you in what benev- 
olent purpose we are now engaged in our read- 



y Google 



270 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

ing circle, and what we have been doing. We 
made the clothes for the children whom I men- 
tioned in a former letter, and then we conclud- 
ed to divide the village into as many portions 
as we had members in -our reading ciccle ; 
and at that time there were eight of us. Each 
one of us then took the part of the village as- 
signed her, and by visiting and inquiring, as- 
certained the wants of those most needy. Cases 
of great poverty we made known to those who 
had charge of money raised for the relief of the 
poor, and others were relieved by their neigh- 
bors. The part we took upon ourselves to per- 
form was, to make clothes for the children that 
we could induce to go to Sabbath-school and to 
church. We furnished materials, and made 
many dresses and other garments. I do not 
certainly know how many have been thus in- 
duced to attend Sabbath-school and church, but 
quite a large number. Some of the parents 
too we helped to Sunday clothes, by soliciting 
the aid of otheirs. Each young lady still con- 
tinues to look after her children, and to ascer- 
tain whether they are constant in their attend- 
ance at the school they entered. 

After we had completed this work, finding 
we could sew as well as not while listening to 



y Google 



YOUNG LADT OP PLEASUBB. 271 

the reading, we consulted our minister in re- 
gard to the object in which he thought we had 
better engage. He mentioned a home mission- 
ary, an acquaintance of his with a large family, 
who he thought would be very glad of our as- 
sistance. He said he would write to him and 
ascertain his wantd, and the ages of his chil- 
dren, so that we could work to better advan- 
tage. He said also, he would mention the ob- 
ject in which we were engaged to some of the 
merchants in the village, and solicit from them 
a donation of materials for the clothes we should 
make. This has been done, and we have now 
ascertained from our minister, that there are 
eight children under seventeen years of age, 
three boys and five girls. We are now upon 
these clothes, and you cannot think how much 
pleasure we take in the work. We shall have 
a nice box full, as many things are contributed 
besidea what we make, some for father and 
mother, as well as for the children. We are 
all so young that we have not had much to do 
with sewing societies, but I think we shall 
prove that there can be reading while people 
are at work, and that there is no diflSculty 
about hearing what is read. We give a gar- 
ment to each one to make, and she prepares 



y Google 



272 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

the work at home, so that there is no need of 
talking about it in our meetings. I think we 
shall make a bedquilt out of our pieces, and 
then we will have a quilting. We are also 
knitting stockings for the children. 

The plan I mentioned of having a report 
of each meeting, meets with great approbation. 
Miss Ash read her report yesterday. She gave 
us a fine account of your letter, which shows 
she must have paid close attention to the read- 
ing. Then she gave a sketch of what we read, 
and also of our conversation during the after- 
noon. 

After the reading of the report, something 
very unexpected occurred. Miss Sill modestly 
suggested, that she had written some thoughts 
on the ** Influence of Natural Scenery upon 
Character." We thanked her for the eflfbrt, 
and begged her to read it. She did so, and I 
assure you it was beautiful. 

After the reading of this piece, we discuss- 
ed the plan of having a paper, and came to the 
conclusion that it was time to commence the 
effort. We decided to call it **The Wreath," 
and the old motto was just the thing for us : 
** Twine around thy brow the unfading Wreath 
of intelligence and virtue." How many asso- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 273 

ciations are suggested by this motto. We ap- 
pointed Miss Doty the first editor. I think 
some of us will endeavor to ascertain whether 
our thoughts will flow in measured numbers, 
as our paper would hardly be complete with- 
out a poetical embellishment. Whether our 
report should have a place in the paper was 
discussed, and decided in the negative. We 
have recently had several new members ; our 
number is now sixteen. We were greatly 
pleased with Miss Wilcox's flowers; and we 
read at that meeting from Akenside's "Pleas- 
ures of the Imagination." How beautiful this 
poem. I think it must have inspired Miss Sill 
to write her essay on the ** Influence of Natural 
Scenery." 

The reading circle meets next week at our 
house. I wish you could be with us. 
Your own 

MARTA. 



12* 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



274 TOUNO LADY OP PLEASUBE. 



LETTER XXXIV. 

MT DEAR MABIA: 

Your letters, my dear girl, increase in in- 
terest. Greatly do I rejoice in the evidence 
that the Holy Spirit is moving upon the hearts 
of that dear circle of young ladies with whom 
you are associated. I hope soon to be glad- 
dened by the intelligence, that all have found 
the Saviour, and have consecrated themselves 
to his service. My heart will be with you in 
your Saturday prayer-meeting, and will unite 
in your petitions at the mercy-seat, and in 
praise and thanksgiving for the abounding 
grace of a covenant-keeping God. 

In your reading circle, you are making that 
a matter of fact which has for years been my 
beau-ideal ; but I have not been as successful 
in carrying out my own schemes, as you have 
been in yours. I can now see why this is. I 
have attempted too much at first, forgetful that 
there is in the mind an indisposition to put 
forth an eflFort, where the performance is deem- 
ed impossible. As one becomes conscious of 
power and an interest in the work, there is 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 276 

a willingness to attempt the accomplishment 
You must however bear in mind, that perse- 
verance and industry will be necessary in sus- 
taining your paper, and in giving it such a chart 
acter as will be worthy of your circle. If your 
members are united in the eflFort, you will cer- 
tainly succeed. 

You must not suflFer yourselves to be so 
much absorbed in your literary pursuits, as to 
permit them to interfere with other necessary 
employments. Duties never really clash, al- 
though this sometimes seems to be the case ; 
but it is because too much at one time is at- 
tempted, or becoming so much engaged with 
one occupation, we are unwilling to leave it 
when something else requires attention. A 
dilatory spirit often brings one into this seem- 
ing difficulty, by inducing a habit of procras- 
tination, instead of nerving one's self to the 
immediate performance of duty. Much ease 
in the accomplishment of business is attained 
by promptness in commencing and energy in 
executing. 

As you are now situated, these literary 
pursuits are your pastime, and they must not 
of course interfere with your domestic duties ; 
but time can be found for each, by denying 



y Google 



276 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

yourself a little of the morning's repose, and 
by fixing the mind npon a topic for composi- 
tion while the hands are engaged in some em- 
ployment. 

It is important for a womau to acquire the 
habit of attending to literary pursuits, without 
neglecting the duties that belong to her station 
in life. It can be done even by those who 
have little assistance in their domestic cares. 
An illustration to the point I can give from 
our family history. My great -grandmother 
was the wife of a farmer in moderate circum- 
stances, and always did her own work. She 
had six children, whom she trained up so that 
they became useful men and women ; and yet 
without interfering with any of her duties, she 
found time not only for reading, but for writ- 
ing. While engaged in her various employ- 
ments during the day, her mind was busy in 
putting her thoughts together on some definite 
subject; and after her children were in bed, 
these ideas were committed to paper. Thus, 
upon her death at an advanced age, her chil- 
dren, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren 
found themselves in the possession of a treas- 
ure more valuable than money. I have a piece 
of poetry written by her at the age of eighty- 



y Google 



YOITNa LADY OF PLEASURE. 277 

five. May you, dear Maria, live as nseftil and 
happy a life, and may your pathway, like hefs, 
shine "brighter and brighter to the perfect 
day." 

Your ladies will excuse this piece of family 
history. It seemed so much to the point, that 
I could not well omit it. I am pleased to know 
what you have done for the children of the vil- 
lage, and also with the object in which you are 
now engaged* 

We should rejoice in finding opportunities 
to advance the cause of the Redeemer. In- 
stead of complaining of the many calls upon 
our benevolence, we should seek out opportu- 
nities of doing good, and be ready to give not 
only labor, but money ; and this can be done 
by denying ourselves little indulgences for 
Christ's sake. 

Then, in the kind of work in which you are 
engaged, there is a benefit to yourselves ; for 
you are acquiring the habit of expertness with 
the needle, and in fitting and making gar- 
ments, an art which belongs to the province of 
woman. 

But you Will begin to think I have quite 
forgotten the request of your ladies, that I would 
give my thoughts on games of chance as an 



y Google 



278 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASURE. 

amusement. I ha^ not forgotten it; but I 
have found so many other things to say, that 
I have put off writing on this subject. In 
truth, it seems a great descent to come to this 
fipom the interesting points which have lately 
occupied our attention. 

To look on and see persons engaged in this 
amusement seems enough to convince one of 
its childishness, and to awaken a marvel that 
grown-up people can engage in any thing that 
is so entirely a waste of time, and a relaxation 
by no means calculated to restore the energies 
of mind or body. 

As I have been situated, I have seen very 
little of such amusements, and I presume I have 
no idea how commonly they are practised as a 
pastime. Not long since, being for several days 
on board a steamer, I was both surprised and 
shocked at the number of persons of both sexes 
who were engaged in this method of passing 
away time. It was difficult to find a place, out 
of my state-room, where I could be free from 
'the annoyance of card-players. 

I suppose it is true that woman, in the vice 
of gambling, as well as in that of drunkenness, 
is less deeply involved than the other sex ; for a 
female gambler seems to be something unusual. 



y Google 



TOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 279 

But as in drinking ardent spirits it has been 
found necessary that woman should come to 
the rescue, not merely pledging herself to ab- 
stain from drunkenness, but to take the pledge 
of total abstinence ; so, in games of chance, it is 
evidently her duty to abstain not merely from 
gambling, but from all games of chance as an 
amusement. 

But the question with many is, whether 
these games are wrong except as they lead to 
gambling. In deciding this point, it is neces- 
sary to consider what renders an amusement 
injurious, or how we are to judge between one 
that is useful and one that is hurtful. We 
have discussed this subject so much, that I 
presume what I shall say would suggest itself 
to you; still I will repeat some things. An 
amusement so fascinating, or producing so great 
an excitement, that there is danger of its being 
indulged beyond the bounds of reason, leading 
one to neglect business or to intrude upon the 
hours of repose, is not safe. To be beneficial, 
it should refresh and invigorate ; but if so ab- 
sorbing as to produce an indisposition or an 
inability for other efforts, the effect is not good. 
No amusements can be innocent that cause the 
commission of sin ; and games of chance lead 



y Google 



280 TOUNQ LADT OF PLEASUBE. 

to a great waste of time, and often excite feel- 
ings contrary to the divine requirements. 

There are indeed games, as checkers,- mar- 
bles, and backgammon, that many professors of 
religion consider a recreation by no means ob- 
jectionable, and by their example young pereons 
are encouraged to give themselves up to these 
fascinating plays. The transition from these 
to cards is very slight, and a game of whist is 
regarded by many as equally innocent ; this is 
becoming more and more common. Professors 
of religion are thus influencing the young to. 
enter upon a dangerous course, from which no 
good can be gained, and which may lead to the 
destruction of the soul. Can they, in pursuing 
this course, be following Christ, and denying 
themselves for his sake? .G-ambling is con- 
demned, but that which leads to it is approved 
and practised. To me this seems an inconsis- 
tency, and I am not alone in this opinion. 

Mr. Green, a reformed gambler, who has 
done much good by his exposures of this vice, 
and his correct views on the subject, compares 
the permitting of children to amuse themselves 
with the games commonly considered innocent, 
to ftirnishing them with false keys. These 
keys, he supposes, will give them access to 



y Google 



TOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 281 

great treasures ; they may be used or not, but 
how great is the danger that one whose heart 
is prone to evil will yield to this temptation. 
"What security have we," says Mr. Green, 
" that a man furnished with these keys would 
not steal, should a good opportunity offer itself?" 
What should we think of a parent who would 
permit his child to become initiated into the' 
art of picking locks ; or who would give him a 
clue to the means used by rogues and scoun- 
drels to rob their fellow-beings ? Is this a use- 
ful kind of knowledge ? Then is putting the 
implements of a gambler into the hands of chil- 
dren safe ? Is initiating them into these games 
training them up in the way they should go ? 
Is it the way in which the parents wish them 
to go ? 

So great is the fascination of amusements 
of this character, that there is no consciousness 
of the amount of time thus frittered away, the 
absolute waste of golden moments. Although 
the professed object is recreation, yet they lead ' 
to a neglect of exercise, and have a less ten- 
dency to refresh the mind than many other 
methods of relaxation. The attention is kept 
intent upon that which in itself is of no conse- 
quence, the changes that must be made to win 



y Google 



282 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

the game. There can be no conversation; 
nothing is heard except barsts of exultation at 
success, or of anger and chagrin at defeat. 

There are, however, games that depend 
upon skill, of a character less injurious, as for 
instance, chess. This is said to discipline the 
^mind as much as the study of mathematics. 
There are also various kinds of plays requiring 
skill, very useful for exercise and pleasant as 
amusements, as ninepins, shuttlecock, graces, 
and others. No betting, however small the 
sum, should be allowed in these plays; and 
indeed the expression '*I'llbet" should never 
be used. It has an evil origin, and^ to say the 
least, is vulgar. 

It is most certainly the duty of our sex, to 
set their faces against an approach to this class 
of amusements, and seek to deter children, as 
well as others over whom they have influence, 
from engaging in pastimes of this character. 

With much love, your friend, 

M. STANLEY. 



y Google 



YOUNG I^ADT OP PLEASURE. 283 



LETTER XXXV. 

MT DEAB MISS STANLEY: 

The ladies of our circle desire me to pre- 
sent their united thanks for the views you have 
given of the subject upon which they requested 
you to write. Many of them had felt greatly 
at a loss what course should be pursued in 
regard to games usually considered innocent. 
Backgammon and checkers are very- common 
in many families here, and some of our best 
people often take a game; having no idea, I 
presume, that it can have any influence in lead- 
ing others to waste their time, or to give them- 
selves up to excess in amusements of this char- 
acter. 

At our last reading circle. Miss Doty sug- 
gested that in her researches for information, 
she had met with a very interesting historical 
item, with which she presumed we should all 
be pleased. It was a resolution passed in Con- 
gress soon after the Declaration of Indepen- 
dence, in regard to amusements. ' It is what I 
know will be interesting to you, and I quote 
both the preamble and the resolution : 



y Google 



2M YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

** Whereas true religion and good morals 
are the only solid foundation of public liberty 
and happiness ; 

** Resolved, That it be, and hereby is, ear- 
nestly recommended to the several states to 
take the most effectual measures for the en- 
couragement thereof, and for the suppression 
of theatrical entertainments, horse-racing, gam- 
ing,^and such other diversions as are produc- 
tive of idleness, dissipation, and a general de- 
pravity of principles and manners." 

How fully this shows the character of those 
who were the founders of our national institu- 
tions, and who purchased our liberty with their 
blood. Such men saw and felt the fearful in- 
fluence of gaming and theatrical amusements; 
and what do not we, as a nation, owe to them? 

Miss Macy gave another item that sur- 
prised us all very much. I suppose it must 
be true, as no one would have made it without 
good authority : 

** William Pryne, an author in the reign of 
I Charles I., brings a catalogue of authorities 
against the stage, containing names of emi- 
nence in the heathen world, as well as among 
Jews and Christians; fifty-four councils, sev- 
enty-one fathers, one hundred and fifty Popish 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 285 

and Protestant authors, the opposition of phi- 
losophers and poets, the legislative enactments 
of pagan and Christian states, magistrates, and 
councils." 

The experience of the world, it would^seem, 
pagan, Jewish, and Christian, has decided the 
theatre to be a school of vice ; and can it be 
that, in this most enlightened age, the theatre 
should be patronized by those who profess to 
be followers of Christ ? 

One or two other items I have gleaned, 
which I will give you: 

" If our Lord's exposition of the seventh 
commandment be correct, the assembly-room 
is no place for Christian morals ; for the cos- 
tume has the eflfect that Montesquieu ascribes 
to Spartan virgins, to strip chastity itself of 
modesty." 

**If the word of G-od be the standard of 
morality, then the whole mass of plays must 
be condemned, and with them the whole sys- 
tem of the play-house." 

We were pleased with your hints in regard 
to the duties of woman ; and that we must not 
neglect household good, nor let literary pur- 
suits interfere with our domestic employments. 
I know you wish us to be true women, filling 



y Google 



286 TOUNO LADT OF FLEASUBE. 

the sphere which Providence requires us to 
occupy. We assure you of our thanks, and 
of our determination, like your great-grand- 
mother, to attend to intellectual pursuits with- 
out interfering with any one of the varied obli- 
gations incumbent upon us in the little domain 
over which we are called to preside. By the 
comforts we dispense, and the happy influence 
we diffuse around us, we would each of us en- 
deavor to be the light of our homes. 
Your own 

MABIA 



y Google 



TOUNQ LADT OF PLEA8UBE. 287 



LETTER XXXVI. 

MT DEAB MABIA: 

Your letter was unusually interesting. Any 
progress which you or your companions make 
is to me a source of enjoyment, and I am glad 
that you understand even my hints so well. 

It is evident that from your reading much 
improvement is derived. The facts and reflec- 
tions which you have gleaned show that your 
minds are actively engaged, and that you read- 
ily discover what has a bearing upon the sub- 
ject which you are engaged in investigating. 

I was greatly interested in the illustrations 
you give of the manner in which amusements 
about which we have been writing have been 
regarded by the wise and good. You have 
discovered that not only the religious portion 
of the community, but rulers, statesmen, and 
philosophers, have seen and felt the theatre to 
be a school of vice, not to be tolerated by any 
one who has the soul of a patriot. In our own 
beloved land, under the influence of the gospel, 
its founders many of them men of God and 
bold in the defence of the truth, how noble 



y Google 



288 YOUNG LADY OP PLEASUBE. 

the stand taken against these soul-destroying 
schemes. Strange it is that any one who re- 
ceives the Bible as the standard of morality, 
can be induced to be present where there is 
danger of beholding scenes so vile, and hearing 
language so corrupt that ** chastity itself seems 
stripped of modesty." How can those who are 
"renewed in the spirit of their minds," whose 
treasure and whose hearts are in heaven, relish 
scenes so opposite to holy employments, scenes 
that fill the mind with thoughts vain, worldly, 
and sensual, and that lead to a violation of the 
requirements of that divine Friend for whom 
they profess a love supreme. 

While reading your letter, I was led to the 
thought that amusements may be considered 
under two aspects : as a cause of the character 
of individuals or nations, and as a result of the 
character possessed. Grecian history fiirhishes 
an illustration of this. The Greeks were in^ 
genious, brave, and fired with a love of glory, 
and their .amusements were such as would be 
relished by such a people ; while at the same 
time the tendency of the contests at thoSe 
games, which were to them an all-absorbing 
pastime, was to render them a nation of heroes, 
and by the exhibition of the fine arts, to in- 



y Google 



TOUNG LA15Y OF PLEASURE. 289 

spire genius and encourage artists. As a natu- 
ral result, Greece became the home of poetry, 
painting, and song, as well as renowned for her 
military prowess. A want of moral purity is 
also discoverable, which cfertainly was not les- 
sened by the manner in which these exercises 
were performed, each competitor appearing 
before •the assembled thousands in a state of 
entire nudity. No woman indeed was permit- 
ted to appear on the Olympian plain, yet cer- 
tain it is that this practice was sustained by 
her influence, as victors in these games were 
those whom all delighted to honor. Her6 I 
would remind you of woman's power in giving 
character to a nation. **As the moon of na- 
ture controls the mighty tides of the ocean, so 
does woman sway and regulate the mighty 
surging sea of human passion." That which 
she tolerates, or to which she gives the seal of 
her approbation, is honorable ; while that upon 
which she frowns, meets rebuke and scorn from 
the other sex. 

The love of glory was a ruling passion with 
Grecian heroes. This is seen in the self-deny- 
ing, earnest efforts to gain the laurel crown on 
the field of Olympia, as well as in the prowess 
of a Leonidas or a Miltiades on the field of 

13 

Digitized byCjQOQlC 



290 YOUNG LADY OF'PLEASURE. 

battle. In Sparta this love of glory was so 
powferfhl in its inflnence, that even the stron- 
gest tie of natare, a mother's love, seemed 
to give place to this all-absorbing passion. 
Fully is this illustrated by the direction of the 
mother to her son: **Eeturn with your shield, 
or upon it;" and again, in an assembly of ma- 
trons, where we behold the mothers -of the 
living clad in the deepest mourning, while 
those whose sons have fallen on the field of 
battle are in bright array, evincing their joy by 
strains of glad exultation. Thus mothers, more 
than military commanders, made the Spartan 
armies invincible. In like manner, Spartan 
huntresses and Athenian hetserse impressed an 
unchaste influence upon the Grecian character. 
In our time Voman's aid has been found 
necessary to stay the progress of intemper- 
ance ; and decidedly should she take her stand 
against all those amusements that corrupt the 
character, and that allure from the path of 
virtue. How great her obligation, that the 
power she wields should be on the side of 
truth and righteousness. Vice should meet 
her withering frown, while with earnest efforts 
she should seek to restore the wretched wan- 
derer. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 291 

The inflnence of amusements upon the na- 
tional character may also be learned by look- 
ing at Eome in the days of her glory. Here 
we* perceive what fearful scenes will become a 
pastime, if woman but give to them the sanc- 
tion of her presence. 

You will recollect that among the Bomans 
under the consular government dancing went 
into disrepute. Instead of this, an amusement 
marked with savage fierceness, though in ac- 
cordance with the spirit of a people who de- 
lighted in war, became the engrossing source 
of pleasure. This was gladiatorial combats. 
Wild beasts and men were the actors. A 
spacious arena was the field for contest, and a 
dense mass of congregated thousands gazed 
upon their fierce encounters and deadly strug- 
gles. In the Grrecian games it was deemed an 
honor to bear a part ; not so in these combats 
at Rome, though sometimes Bomans of the 
patrician rank, and even the emperor himself, 
as, for instance, Commodus, were actors on this 
bloody field. The gladiators or men trained 
for these conflicts were slaves, or captives 
taken in war ; and were compelled to engage 
in these sports to give pleasure to the sons and 
daughters of imperial Bome, the proud mistress 



y Google 



292 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

of the world. Malefactors, and those doomed 
to death, here met a bloody end. Thus many 
a Christian, even the tender and delicate woman 
who loved the Saviour, was torn in pieces by 
the furious beast, for the amusement of the 
crowd — like Perpetua, who, though implored by 
her pagan father and husband to save her life 
by renouncing her religion, rather than deny 
her blessed Saviour, suflfered this cruel death. 
The influence of these sports upon the na- 
tional character was unlike that of the Grecian 
games. In Greece every man aspired to the 
honor of being an actor on the Olympian plain ; 
and the self-denying regimen practised by those 
who prepared themselves for the contest fitted 
them to act the part of heroes in struggling for 
the defence of their country ; while the scenes 
displayed on this field of glory fired each one 
with a desire to wear the victor's crown. The 
combats of gladiators had no such influence ; 
but caused the spectators to delight in scenes 
of blood, and to be amused with sights revolt- 
ing to the better feelings of the soul. The 
Colosseum, which still stands a monument of 
Roman greatness, is also a monument of Eoman 
shame; for it carries one back to the days 
when this mighty edifice was thronged with 



y Google 



YOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 298 

Roman citizens, with warriors and statesmen, 
wives, mothers, and maidens, even the emperor 
himself there, all finding their pleasure in the 
contests and dying struggles not only of wild 
beasts, but of their fellow-men. So much did 
this pleasure-loving people delight in this 
amusement, that one of the greatest favors that 
could be conferred was to prolong the oppor- 
tunity for witnessing these combats. Thus the 
emperor Trajan, in celebrating his triumph, 
feasted the Romans for four months with these 
bloody sports. 

At the same time a blessed influence was 
pervading this mighty empire. The Son of 
God had made his advent into this world of 
sin and death, and the glad news of salvation 
had been proclaimed not only in Rome, but 
through the length and breadth of all the lands 
that were under her sway. Many had embraced 
the blessed offer of salvation, confessed Christ 
before men, and followed him, though it led to 
prison and to a bloody death. Earnestly did 
these self-denying followers of the Redeemer 
labor to spread a religion which brings ** peace 
on earth, good-will to men;" much did they 
mourn over these abominations, and fervently 
did they pray that that kingdom might come. 



y Google 



294 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

which is •'righteousness, peace, and joy in the 
Holy Ghost;" still the wide-spread arena was 
drenched with hnman gore, and drew together 
its thousands. 

The influence of this blessed gospel had 
produced a mighty transformation even in the 
palace of the Caesars. Already had the em- 
peror Constantino declared himself on the side 
of these persecuted ones, and proclaimed Chris- 
tianity the religion of the empire. Theodosius 
the Grreat had also taken his stand with those 
who worship the true and living Grod; pagan 
temples and idols had been overthrown, and 
the followers of Christ, so long despised and 
oppressed, were elevated to places of trust and 
power, and clothed in robes of state. Still this 
barbarous amusement, this disgrace to Chris- 
tian Rome, was not abolished. The amphithe- 
atre was thronged with its thousands, and men 
and brutes poured, out th^ir lifeblood there. 
On one such day a congregated mass might 
have been seen intently gazing upon the arena, 
where stand two fierce and stalwart comba- 
tants ready for the fearful onset. The imperial 
purple graces the scene, for the emperor Hono- 
rius is himself present. 

Let us now survey an assembly of a far 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUEE. 295 

different character in a remote part of this 
mighty emporium. In a narrow and secluded 
street is a house dedicated to the worship of 
the true Grod. A little band of Christians have 
here met together, and earnestly are they 
pleading with their Father in heaven in behalf 
of this guilty city. Now they pray, that for 
the glory of his own great name, he would 
overthrow the devices of Satan, and cause this 
abominable sport to cease. The emperor is 
remembered in ihis prayer ; earnestly do they 
supplicate for him strength to decree righteous 
decrees, and that, fearing not the face of man, 
but fearing God, he may put an end to this 
fearful sin. They rise from their knees and 
commune together ; they earnestly desire that 
the heart of this people may be turned to 
God, and thus be led to renounce the service 
of Satan. All in this little praying assembly 
are affected in view. of their obligation to do 
what they can ; but one is more deeply moved 
than the others. He declares that something 
can be done, that he will make an effort, and 
that God will be with him. For this he has 
left his home, he has come from the land where 
for guilty man the Saviour laid down his life. 
Far off among the mountains of Judea he had 



y Google 



296 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

heard of this sin of Christian Borne ; he had 
heard of the thousands delighting in these scenes 
of blood and death ; and praying that he might 
be an instrument in ending this disgraceful, 
this wicked amusement, he has sought the im- 
perial city. Amazed at his words, all seek to 
dissuade him from making any effort, each one 
assuring him that nothing can be done but to 
pray, and to keep aloof from this scene of 
iniquity. But his purpose is fixed, and he 
leaves this place of prayer alone ; his heart 
resting on God, and going out in earnest sup- 
plication that for Jesus' sake he might be di- 
rected and strengthened in performing the great 
work. 

As he approaches the arena there is a move- 
ment among the crowd of spectators, for by his 
dress a Christian monk is recognized. An ex- 
pression of surprise is visible, that he, one 
of these praying men, should be present at a 
gladiatorial combat. But not long is he the 
object of attention, for the actors are engaged 
in the deadly struggle, and the multitude are 
gazing upon them with fiendish joy. 

Suddenly a burst of indignation peals from 
the maddened throng ; for see, that Christian 
has thrown himself between the combatants, 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 297 

earnestly striring to appease their rage, and to 
terminate this mortal conflict. 

The emperor looks on with approbation, 
but the infuriated spectators rush upon the in- 
truder. Overpowered and crushed by many 
blows, he fells; but, bloody and dying, at the 
royal command he is borne into the presence 
of Honorius. And now, confusion being hush- 
ed, the emperor addresses the assembled mul- 
titude, thus declaring, '*In the presence of this 
murdered saint, this holy and expiring martyr, 
I make my fixed and irrevocable decree, and 
abolish for ever the combats of gladiators, the 
disgrace of Christian Rome." 

This was the last gladiatorial combat ; and 
the Christian monk Telemachus was the honor- 
ed instrument in causing this fierce and bloody 
amusement to cease. God was his helper, and 
he accomplished the work, though, like Samson, 
the victory was purchased with his life, and he 
fell with his enemies. 

It was considered a great inconsistency for 
one who had embraced the religion of Christ 
to be present at a gladiatorial combat, even a 
denial of the Saviour ; and if the stage is the 
masterpiece of all the devices of the great enemy 
of souls, and the dancing party an introduction 
13* 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



298 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

to his service, should a Christian ever be seen 
at these places of amosement? 

To follow Christ implies that we should do 
nothing that he would not do ; that we should 
visit no place, engage in no business or pleas- 
ure, upon which we cannot implore his bless- 
ing ; in short, that the same mind be found in 
us which was in him ; for '4f any man have not 
the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." May we 
* not hope that the influences of the Holy Spirit, 
so abundantly poured out upon our land, will 
produce a change ; and that instead of conform- 
ing to the world, the people of God with one 
accord will separate themselves from the sins 
which so much abound. Young Christians should 
not excuse themselves for indulgence in sinful 
amusements because they have known older 
professors of religion engage in them. They 
may thus go astray from Grod, and bring dark- 
ness into their own souls; they may dishonor 
the cause of the Eedeemer, and cause the enemy 
to blaspheme His holy name. 

Dear Maria, I must bring my long letter to 
a close, hoping that you and your friends may 
be interested and proi&ted by it. 
Yours with love, 

M. STANLEY. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 299 



LETTER XXXVII. 

MY DRAB FBIEND : 

Your letter was fall of the deepest interest. 
I had given it two careful perusals before the 
meeting of the reading circle, and then I read 
it again; and the conversation that followed 
the more deeply impressed its contents upon 
our minds. 

How thrilling the story of Telemachus, and 
how wonderful the result of his efforts. God 
did hear his prayers, and the prayers of those 
Christians who had met together to sigh and 
cry over the abominations done in the midst of 
them. The emperor received strength for the 
performance of a duty, from which doubtless 
he felt like shrinking. This poor monk from 
the mpuntains of Judea seems to have been 
raised up and enabled to accomplish what no 
other man dared to attempt. 

While reading your letter my mind was 
impressed by your idea that the approbation 
of our sex, or the sanction given by their pres- 
ence, is necessary to render an amusement 
popular. What a responsibility then rests upon 



y Google 



800 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 

woman ; and how inconsistent that with all her 
refined sensibility she should encourage diver- 
sions which have any tendency to pollution, 
cruelty, tgid vice. How plainly the depravity 
of the heart appears, when she seems willing 
that the affections which belong to her nature 
should be deadened by the overpowering influ- 
ence of a desire for self-gratification. As 
woman was first in the transgression, it would 
seem that when she rejects the Saviour, she 
still continues the leader in the path to ruin. 
Yet '*she has this honor, that the Incarnate 
One was the woman's seed,^' and when she 
espouses the cause of the Redeemer, and her 
heart glows with love to him, great is her in- 
fluence in bringing others to **drink of the 
water of life." ** Piety is indeed the brightest 
jewel in her crown." May it be said of each 
of us, as of Mary of old, **She hath done what 
she could ;" and like those devoted women who 
were '*last at the cross, and earliest at the 
tomb," may we stand up for Christ, fearless of 
the reproach and sco>n of a wicked and gain- 
saying world. 

It is I suppose true, that many more of our 
sex than of the other are members of the churdi 
of Christ. I know the infidel sneers at this 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF FLEASUBK. 801 

fact, and declares this religion only fit for 
women and children ; but his conscience mast 
condemn him for admitting the thoaght I 
have no donbt that, when alone, he shndders in 
view of an eternity without the favor of God ; 
and gladly would he have the hopes and con- 
solations of the Christian on the bed of death. 
The infidel Allen dared not commend his own 
belief to his dying daughter; but when she 
turned to him, earnestly asking in whose faith 
she should die, in his or in her mother^s, he 
replied, ** Your mother's, child." 

I recollect the account of the martyr Per- 
petua, and that she was implored by her pagan 
father and husband, for the sake of the babe 
that clung to her breast, to deny her Saviour, 
and to declare her belief in the gods of Rome ; 
but love to Jesus enabled her to resist their 
entreaties, and she was taken from prison to 
a bloody death. Enclosed in a net, she was 
tossed by a wild bull until her bodily sufferings 
were ended, and she received an abundant 
entrance into a world of glory. What a change 
to her from earth to heaven! 

How dijferent the condition of Christians at 
that time from what it is at present. Beligion 
now walks in ** silver slippers," and the great 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



80S TOUKO LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

cross to be taken up when entering apon the 
service of Christ, is relinquishing one's self- 
gratification, or incurring reproach by not con- 
forming to the extravagances and frivolities of 
fashionable life. If martyrs were only per- 
forming their duty when they suffered fearful 
tortures rather than deny their Saviour, how 
can we be his true followers, if we do not re- 
nounce the vanities of the world for the sake 
of this blessed Friend? To give up all for 
Christ must certainly mean, practising some 
self-denial. 

The course pursued by Lady Huntingdon, 
and the great good she accomplished, is it not 
an illustration of this entire consecration to 
God ? What a contrast between a professor 
of religion who in a year expends a thousand 
dollars to adorn her person, and this noble 
lady, who devoted her princely fortune to pur- 
poses of Christian benevolence, allowing her- 
self each year, but one new dress. It is not 
often that in a large 'assembly of persons of 
the highest rank one is distinguished, as was 
this eminent woman, by what a nobleman was 
pleased to call a ** shabby dress;" nor indeed 
by such an encomium on her character as was 
given in reply by the king: **I should think 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



YOUNG LADT OF PLEASURE. 303 

myself happy to be able to lay hold on that 
robe when she ascends to heaven." 

Can a devotion to the demands of fashion, 
a living for self-gratification, be in accordance 
with the requirement of our Saviour : ** If any 
man will come after me, let him deny himself, 
and take up his cross and follow me?" It 
seems to me we cannot be too earnest in seek- 
ing to know wherein we ought to deny our- 
selves, or too firm in resisting temptation. En- 
gaging in fashionable amusements does not fit 
one for the communion-table, 'for secret devo- 
tion,, or for the* family altar. I do not think 
any one, after a night spent. in these frivolous 
and exciting scenes, can draw near to her Fa- 
ther in heaven, and enjoy his presence. 

I must not forget to give you an account of 
our reading circle last Thursday. You know we 
were to have the first number of our '* Wreath." 
Miss Doty was present in very good season. 
Her paper filled six sheets, and was beauti- 
fully written. First we had our report, quite 
a composition, by Miss Brace. We had read 
two of your first letters at our last meeting, 
and she gave quite a sketch of them. Then 
Miss Doty read her paper. She opened with 
an editorial, in which she gave an account of 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



dOi YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBlB. 

our circle from the commencement, of our pres- 
ent condition, and the design of oar paper. 
The next piece was poetry, by one of our num- 
ber ; then a dialogue, '' Scenes in Jerusalem in 
the time of our Saviour." There were two 
essays: one, "What is man?" and the other, 
** Friendship the wine of life." There was a 
playfal sketch of the trials of a poor house- 
keeper, with various items of interest inter- 
spersed, and a fine editorial address at the 
close. Miss Macy is our next editor, and I 
am to write the next report. I do not think 
we shall have any difl&culty in sustaining our 
paper. 

Your own 

MAKTA. 



y Google 



TOUNa LADY OF PLEASUBK SOS 



LETTER XXXVIII. 

MYDEAB MAEIA: 

In perusing your letter, my heart was full 
of joy as I read your clear and correct views 
of duty ; and I can truly say, if I have been 
instrumental in leading you to take this stand, 
** to God be all the glory." I was delighted 
with the account which you gave of your pa- 
per, and hope you will continue to sustain it 
with interest and ability. Both the report and 
the paper will add greatly to the pleasure of 
your reading circle. 

That the amusements in which persons de- 
light indicate the character,, needs no argument. 
Our intercourse with the world renders this 
point self-evident. These recreations are call- 
ed pleasures, because in this manner pleasura- 
ble feelings are excited ; and being the volun- 
tary expression, they -must of course show 
plainly the state of the heart. They are so- 
cial, and a similarity of taste is therefore nec- 
essary in order that persons may enjoy them 
together. We see this everywhere. . In a 
happy domestic circle, though the employ- 



y Google 



806 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASURE. 

ments may be various, there is sympathy in 
every joy and every sorrow ; but there can cer- 
tainly be little happiness in that home whose 
inmates must separate to find their enjoyment 
Dissimilarity of taste is undoubtedly one great 
hinderance to domestic felicity. When a fol- 
lower of Jesus is united to a person who has 
no relish for the pure and elevating joys of a 
Christian, how can there be the full enjoyment 
of this sweetest source of earthly bliss? To 
a person of true refinement, how uncongenial 
are pleasures low and vulgar ; how impossible 
for the ignorant and sensual to share the joys 
of the intellectual and spiritual-minded; still 
more impossible must it be for a person of a 
heavenly mind to relish the frivolous pleas- 
ures of a scene of vain amusement. 

The study of the New Testament shows 
plainly that whatever tends to promote rivalry^ 
pride, vanity, impurity, and deception, is inim- 
ical to the spirit of the gospel ; so also what- 
ever leads to irreverence and a supreme de- 
votion to one's self, putting God out of the 
thoughts: all these must be abhorrent to one 
whose heart is in heaven. That Christian 
parents should permit any thing with such a 
tendency to be practised in their houses, or 



y Google 



YOUNO LADt OP PLEASUBE. 307 

that they should snlBFer their children to acquire 
a taste for pastimes haying this evil influence, 
seems, altogether inconsistent with their obliga- 
tions to Crod, and to these loved ones committed 
to their charge. I know that children of pious 
parents do engage in such recreations. I know 
too, that professors of religion themselves some- 
times play cards, attend dancing parties, the 
theatre, and the opera ; but I am sure those do 
not who are unwilling to engage in any thing 
upon which they cannot ask the blessing of God. 
The following incident illustrates this : 

A minister in New England, when travel- 
ling, not being able to reach a public-house, 
called at a private dwelling, and requested per- 
mission to spend the night. He was hospita- 
bly received and entertained. After the sup- 
per was removed, a pack of cards was pro- 
duced, and the stranger invited to join in the 
amusement. **With all my heart/' said he, 
'*if you will first f)ermit me to do one thing." 
With eager curiosity it was asked what this 
might be. He replied seriously, ** Implore the 
blessing of God upon the game." To this of 
course there was no reply; for there is, even 
to the thoiaghtless pleasure-seeker, an incon- 
gruity in seeking the blessing of God upon a 



y Google 



806 .TOUNa LADY OF PLEASURE. 

vain amusement. The good man, finding all 
were silent, proceeded, ''I am a minister of 
the gospel of Christ, and in whatever employ- 
ment I engage, it is my privilege to seek the 
blessing of God." Upon this the gentleman 
put away his cards, and proposed to invite the 
neighbors, and have a religious meeting. To 
this the clergyman assented, and the evening 
was spent in an interesting and profitable man- 
ner. Here we find a good test for any thing 
in which we proppse to engage, to seek for the 
divine blessing in its performance; and how 
can one dare to enter upon any business or 
pleasure in which he may not hope for the 
favor of the infinite Ruler of all things? 

God promises blessings to descend upon 
children's children ; but if is to those who 
"keep his covenant, and remember his com- 
mandments to do them." The command is, 
"Train up a child in the way he should go;" 
and the promise, " when he is old he will not 
depart from it." If the acquisition of fashion- 
,able accomplishments interferes with this obli- 
gation, how plain is the duty of a Christian 
parent. But children, in this important mat- 
ter, too often pursue the course which accords 
with their own inclinations. 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASURE. 309 

I am induced to suggest this subject to those 
who are yet young, that they may feel the im- 
portance of becoming fitted to discharge the 
obligations that may one day devolve upon 
them. With all the advantages now enjoyed 
by our sex, still as a general thing they do not 
receive sufl&cient instruction to fit them for their 
peculiar vocation, nor are they trained up with 
reference to the duties which in a few years 
they will be expected to perform. 

The inventions in labor-saving machinery 
have exonerated woman from many kinds of 
employment which formerly occupied the time 
and attention of our sex. The wheel and the 
loom, former implements of female industry, 
are now curiosities rarely seen. Still it is 
true, that with this freedom from labor, and 
opportunity for improvement, we do not see 
an advancement commensurate with the ad- 
vantages enjoyed. Our grandmothers, while 
their knowledge of the sciences was very lim- 
ited, their lessons often learned at the spinning- 
wheel, were many of them more distinguished 
for discrimination of mind and good common- 
sense, than wome]Q of the present day. They 
may not have been as brilliant as their more 
privileged daughters, but they were quite as 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



810 TOUNO LADY OF PLEASUBB. 

« 

efficient in performing the duties belonging to 
their various stations in lifp. Not that the 
increase of advantages opened to our sex is the 
cause of regret, but that these advantages are 
not better improved ; that the means so boun- 
tifully bestowed are not so used as to produce 
the end so much to be desired. Even the great 
facilities for obtaining an education, and the 
few impediments in the way of its attainment, 
may be one cause of the little advancement 
that many seem to make. Wfiile '* impossi- 
bility is the death of effort," it is still true that 
obstacles increase the mental vigor by bring- 
ing into exercise all the energies of the soul in 
surmounting them. 

We often hear of self-made men — of men 
who, contending with poverty and other diffi- 
culties, by their own efforts acquire an educa-» 
tion. Such persons become distinguished in 
the world's history, and make the deepest and 
broadest mark upon th^ age in which they live. 
Pages might be filled with the names of those 
who, despite discouragements the most appall- 
ing, have still pressed onward and upward tp 
the highest eminence. We find them occupy- 
ing stations of commanding influence in the 
church, the state, the camp, in the field of 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBB. ^ 811 

scientific research, and in those inventions that 
have put a new face upon the world. 

The same is true of our sex. It is an ob- 
servation I have often made among my own 
pupils, that those whose pathway is smoothest 
often make the least advancement ; while those 
who have many difficulties to encounter become 
distinguished for their attainments. Mary Lyon 
here stands forth as an illustrious instance of a 
eelf-made woman; and many others there are 
who, though their names are unknown to fame, 
by their own earnest efforts have triumphed 
over obstacles, gained a thorough education, 
acquired a well-balanced mind, and have filled 
with eminence the most important stations. 
True it is, while labor conquers all things, with- 
out labor nothing can be accomplished; and 
one of the saddest features of the present time 
is, that, among the fashionable class of ladies, 
labor is deemed inconsistent with gentility. 
Even in our republican ^country, thoSe who are 
the daughters of affluence and not obliged to 
make an effort, may be found passing a great 
portion of their time in easy indolence, amusing 
themselves with a sort of elegant trifling. To 
dress, and sit in the parlor for company; to 
make fashionable calls, attend parties or gay 



y Google 



812 X^^^^ LADT OF PLEA8UBE. 

assemblies, perhaps to play the piaao, and do 
fancy needlework, or to perform so literary 
an employment as the reading of novels, this 
seems to be tiie summing np of what they ac- 
complish, having apparently no object in view 
but their own gratification. 

What a character must thos be acquired; 
and how unfitted to discharge the important 
duties of a wife, mother; and mistress^ of a 
&mily. How can she who has no thought of 
any one but self, be devoted to another? How 
deny herself, when her strongest impulse is 
self-gratification? How can she who has only 
lived to be amused think of business ; and how 
direct business to which she is an utter stran- 
ger? How can she who has practised no self- 
control, manage the complicated affairs of her 
little domain, and train up aright the immortal 
beings committed to her charge? How can she 
submit cheerfully to the wishes of another, when 
she looks upon the world as made only to sub- 
serve her wishes? 

Ignorance of domestic employments, and a 
habit of living for one's own pleasure, causes 
not only many a heart-ache, but other serious 
and permanent evils. Without a habit of 
thought and of patient submission, a willing- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLlJASURIi. 313 

ness to set aside one's own preferences, and to 
attend with alacrity to the numberless little 
things that promote the comfort of others — 
when the presiding spirit in a household is des- 
titute of these traits of character, how can there 
be a happy home? These thoughtless ones, 
.devoted to dress and display, who cannot work, 
but can spend money, and whose pleasure is 
found, not in the domestic sphere, but in scenes 
of vain amusement, by their folly and extrav- 
agance drive many a poor man to deeds of 
desperation, or to a drunkard's grave. 

I have recently met a lady answering 
exactly to this description ; a thoughtless being, 
who in the five months since her marriage has 
run her husband as many hundred dollars in 
debt; who seems to think it impossible to live 
where she cannot attend the theatre and danc- 
ing' parties; and who refuses to engage in any 
kind of domestic employment. She eats and 
sleeps and lounges, amusing herself with trifling 
plays. In reply to my inquiry if she was fond 
of reading, she said, "Nothing. but novels;" 
and she added, **I used to like to read the 
Bible when a child, but since I have read so 
many novels I do not like to read the Bible." 
She professes to dislike all kinds of work, and 

14 

Digitized byCjOOQlC 



814 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 

seems only intent npon being amused, dressing 
extravagantly, and having her own way. This 
is no fancy sketch ; would that it were a solitary 
instance. 

In reading your allusion to the advice of 
Allen to his daughter, I could not but feel how 
amazing the responsibility of Christians ; how 
important that they should so live as to im- 
press the world with the reality of religion. If 
by their works they deny the solemn profes- 
sions they have made, how fearful the influence 
they exert. Who will by their example be 
impressed with the excellence of true religion, 
or be led to honor our divine Lord and Mas- 
ter? A consistent living Christian is *'the 
light, the sun of this world, each in his place." 
"The eye, the face, the gait, the motions, the 
tone of the voice, as well as the words and 
actions, have all an expression indicative of 
the moral character." In all the walks of life 
an influence is exerted upon those around him. 
There is a preparation in the nature of all like 
the plate of the Daguerrean, upon which im- 
pressions are indelibly stamped. What an 
amazing responsibility to live in Grod's world, 
and to live for eternity. It is not by noisy 
bustling efforts that these influences are im- 



y Google 



YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE. 815 

parted ; it is by heart efforts made to the hid- 
den aflfeetions that the work is constantly being 
performed. As the all-powerful orb of day 
silently delineates the images of objects with 
more exactness than the finger of art, so the 
involuntary influence that goes out from each 
of us, paints pictures on those who stand in our 
light after the pattern of our own character. 
If the soul be full of Christ, it cannot be fall of 
the world; and if the spirit of our blessed 
Lord be within us, its influence will be felt 
through all the circle in which we move. In 
the beautiful language of Cowper, 

** When one that holds communion -with the skies, 
Has Med his urn where these pure waters rise, 
And once more mingles with earth's meaner things, 
"Tis e*en as if an angel shook his wings ; 
Immortal fragrance fills the circuit wide, ' 
That tells us whence his treasures are supplied." 

Some thoughts of Dr. Dick on the subject 
of amusements are so much in point that you 
will, I know, excuse me for quoting them. 

**If man were only the creature of a day, 
whose whole existence was confined within the 
limits of this sublunary scene, he might amuse 
himself with facts or fancies, or with any gew- 
gaws that happen to strike his fancy, as he 
glides down the stream of time to the gulf of 

Digitized by CjOOQ iC 



816 YOUNG LADY OF PLEASUBE, 

oblivion But if he is a being destined for 
eternity, the training of his thoughts ought to 
be directed to objects corresponding to his high 
destination; and all his amusements blended 
with those moral and religious instructions 
which have an ultimate reference to the scene 
of his immortal existence." ' 

I am happy in being assured that there is 
one circle of young ladies who are looking at 
the subject of amusements in the same light as 
Dr. Dick. May you long be united in your 
eflForts, mutually aiding each other in diffusing 
a right influence among those with whom you 
mingle; and may this influence widen and 
deepen through the length and breadth of this 
our highly favored land. 

If I have been able by my letters to afford 
you aid in searching for the right way, it is, I 
assure you, a cause of unfeigned thanksgiving 
to God, as it has been a source of great enjoy- 
ment to 

Your affectionate friend, 

M. STAOTjEY. 



y Google 



Mtttmitim n»A f atuaMi ^ivpn0it». 



Life of Rev. Justin Edwards, D. D. 

Constrained by the loye of Christ, he deyoted a long life to the 
ministry, and the efficient promotion of the cause of Temperance, 
the Sabbath, and the stady of the Bible. Steel portrait. 656 pp. 
12ma 

Memoir of Rev. James IVIilhor, D. D. 

By Bey. John S. Stone, D. D., -with an admirable likeness. Full 
of incident and instruction, alike attractiye to the ardent youth, 
the man of business, the humble Christian, and the mature Theo- 
logian. 549 pp. 12ma 

Life of George Whitefield. 

With steel portrait, and other engravings. His briUiant career 
is traced as he preached eighteen thousand sermons, crossed the 
ocean thirteen times, and poured evangelical light on millions of 
minds in Great Britain and the United States. 514 pp. 12ma 

Life of Rev. Dj. Scott, the Commentator 

steel portrait Bising from obscurity by his own energy, he 
became preeminently useful iu the pulpit and thjK)ugh the press. 
502 pp. 12mcL 

Life, Character, and Writmgs of Dr. Philip Doddridge. 

With steel portrait. Prepared with great care and research, 
and has a value beyond that of any mere biography. 480 pp. 
l2mo. 

Memoir of Rev. Jeremiah Hallock. 

With sketch of Bev. Moses Hallock. Faithfal and successful pas- 
tors, and laborers in the great revivals early iu the present centu- 
xy. Steel frontispiece. 389 pp. 12mo. 

Memoir of Rev. John Summerfield. 

steel portrait. Few memoirs are more entertaining, or richer 
in the attractions of the cross, or more worthy of a world-wide cir- 
culation. 339 pp. 12mo. 

Life of Rev. Philip Henry. 

Father of the Commentator. One of the richest memoirs in our 
language. Steel portrait 346 pp. 12mo. 

1 



y Google 



Memoir of Rev. Matthew Henry, 

The grefti Commentator. Tn his youth he yialted Baxter in prison, 
and dianlc deeply of his spirit 218 pp. 18mo. 

The Haldanes and their Friends. 

A narratiTe of deepest interest, describing the labors of the 
devoted brothers Bobert and James Alexander Haldane, with their 
contemporaries, in the glorions reyiyal about the beginning of the 
present centory. Steel portrait 278 pp. 12mo. 

Life of Rev. Richard Knill, 

Of St. Petebsbubg, Bussia. Steel portrait He was owned of 
God m leading yery many sonls to Jesus, scores of whom became 
preachers of the gospeL 858 pp. 18ma 

Memoir of Rev. Dr. Payson. 

With portrait It opens before the reader a rich fountain of Chris- 
tian experience, and presents impressire and beautiful illustrations 
of tnith and duty. 486 pp. 18mo. 

Memoir of James B. Taylor. 

With portrait A character of uncommon attractions to old and 
young. 528 pp. 18mo. 

Life of David Brainerd. 

New edition, with enlarged type, and engravings. Uniting in 
a remarkable manner the fervor of personal piety and devoted 
missionary zeaL 482 pp. 18mo. 

Life of Harlan Page. 

Steel portrait The power of his example is seen at this day in 
greatly increased persona^ effort for the conversion of souls to 
Christ 243 pp. 18mp. 

Memoir of Rev. John Newton. 

A most striking narrative.* The latter years of his life endeared 
his memory it> millions. 254 pp. 18mo. 

Memoir of Charles H. Porter. 

Kindred in spirit to Harlan Page and James B. Taylor. 168 
pp. 18mo. 

Life of Richard Baxter. 

Presenting his own interesting history, and also the rude and 
persecuting spirit of the times. 181 pp. 18mo, / 

Life of Normand Smith. 

The Christian serving God in his business. 72 pp. 18mo. 



y Google 



BlAiTIPUlL FEMALE iliedRAPMIES. 
Hannah More, or Life in Hall and Cottage. 

By Mbs. H. O. Knight. Two steel engravings. A charming por- 
traiture of one whom the church loves to honor. 282 pp. 12ma 

Memoir of Miss Mary Lyon, 

The distinguished founder of Mount Holyoke Female Seminary. 
Itich in Christian experience, and giving impulse to all in the 
work of (xod. Steel portrait. 376 pp. 12mo. 

Lady Huntington and her Friends. 

With four fine steel engravings. A glowing sketch of this remark- 
able woman, and of her contemporaries, Doddridge, Whitefield, 
"Wesley, and others who were blessed of God in the great revival 
of the last century. 292 pp. 12mo. 

Memoir of Mrs. Isabella Graham. 

Enriched by her narrative of her husband's death, and other 
select correspondence. One of the best female biographies of any 
age. Steel portrait. 438 pp. 12ma 

Mrs. Sarah L. H. Smith. 

Late of the Syrian mission. She was a model of female excellence 
worthy of imitation by all the daughters of our land. Steel por- 
trait. 396 pp. 12mO. 

Memoir of Mrs. Harriet L. Winslow. 

For thirteen years a devoted missionary in Ceylon. Its narrative 
of events in the missionary life are highly entertaining and instruc- 
tive. Steel portrait. 480 pp. 18mo, 

The Pastor*s Wife, 

Or Mbs. Mabtha Shebman. An attractive memoir, and full of in- 
struction. Steel portrait. 342 pp. 18mo. 

Mrs. E. R. Bradley. 

Ten years a missionary in Siam. A volume of much interest 176 
pp. 18mO, 

The Withered Branch Revived. 

A beautifol- narrative illustrating the evil influence of fashiona- 
ble amusements upon a young Christian, and the power of Gk)d's 
grace in reclaiming and reviving the wanderer. 72 pp. 18mo. 



y Google 



Pi^tovt) anil ^nvtivtfi. 



D'Aubigne's History of the Great Reformation. 

In fiT« Yolmnes 12mo; 2,494 pp. Five steel portraits. A learned 
professor has well said, this is "one of the most timely and'osefol 
works of the present century. The style is graphic and fall of life, 
and a deUshtfol spirit of eyangelical piety pervades the whole." 

Sketches from Life. Series I. and II. 

These two yolnmes comprise more than three hnndred and 
fifty interesting and impressiye narratiyes, with many engrayings. 
12ma 

Revival Sketches and Manual. 

By Bsy. Db. Hxtmphbet. A work adapted to encourage Christians 
in efforts to promote the cause of Christ. 476 pp. 12mo. 

Elegant Narratives. 

Twenty-fonr select tracts, beantifaUy printed and illustrated. 
600 pp. 12mo. 

Pictorial Narratives. 

Twenty-four illustrated tracts. 252 pp. 12mo. 

Anecdotes, for the Family Circle. 

Containing three hundred and eight anecdotes, each conyeying 
some yalnable lesson, foil of interest and iustniction to alL Fine- 
ly illostrated. 603 pp. 18mo. 

Haste to the Rescue. 

A narratiye of God's blessing upon the noble efforts of an Eng- 
lish lady to reclahn and lead to Christ the laboring clas3es of a 
large town. With frontispiece. 324 pp. 18mo. 

Seamen's Narratives. ' 

An interesting yolume for sailors. Illustrated. 284 pp.. 18mo« 

Annals of the Poor. 

Legh Bichmonds beautiful narratiyes of the Daibyman's Daugh- 
TEB, African SEEyANT, and Youno Cottagbb. 320 pp. 18ma 

The Dairyman's Daughter. 

New edition, illustrated, large type. 180 pp. 18ma 

The Young Cottager. 

In the same style as the aboye. 143 pp. 



y Google 



Baxter's Saints' Everlastiiig Hest. 

Five hundred and forty pages, 12mo^ large type. 

Baxter's Treatise on Conversion. 

Its nature, necessity, benefits, and llinderances. 408 pp., 12nu^ 

Baxter's Beformed Pastor, 

Or the Duty of Personal Effort for the Souls of Men. A glowing, 
inspiriting appeal, adapted to stimulate all Christians in duty. 
355 pp., 12mo. 

Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. 

Almost whole households — ^in one case six hrothers — ^have been 
hopefully converted through this work. The Society has circur ' 
lated more than 400,000 copies. 176 pp. 18mo. 

Baxter's Dying Thoughts. 

Showing what every Christian should aspire after, and by the 
grace of Gk)d may attain. 173 pp. 18mo. 

Riches of Bunyan. 

Comprising^ a,compendium of theological knowledge. 488 pp. 
12mo. 

Flavel's Redemption. 

Comprising the Fountain of Life, or Display of Christ in his 
Essential and Mediatorial Glory; Method of Grace, or the Holy 
Spirit applying the redemption of Christ, each 70 cts. ; and Christ 
Knocking at the Door, an overwhelming practical application of 
the truths in the first two volumes, 70 cts. Sold singly; or in a 
set, 1,516 pp. 12mo. 

Flavel on Keeping the" Heart. 

One hundred and ninety-two pages 18mo. 

Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity. 

One hundred and eighty-six pages 18mo. 

Bishop Hopkins on the Ten Coxmnandments. 

An iuvaluable compendium of rich and instructive thought on 
the moral law. 442 pp. 12mo. 

Venn's Complete Duty of Man, 

Or a system of Doctrinal and Practical Christianity. 430 pp. 
12mo. 



y Google 



HELPS TO BIBLE STUDY. 



Tke Famfly Bible, Boyal OctaTo^ Beyised EditioxL 
With brief Notes and Instnictions, Marginal References, an Ihtro- 
daotion to each book, a Haimony of the Gospels, new Maps, Tables 
of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Aposties, Bible Chronology, and a 
Family Beoord. For general nse in fiamily worship and Bible 
stndy. 1, 6Qi pages. In one Tolnme sheep, or three voliunes doth. 

PaiDily Testament and Psalms, 

With Notes, etb. A beautiful Yolnme of 524 pages super-royal 
8to« 

Pocket Testament, 
With Notes, Maps, etc. 18mo, 810 pages. 

A Diotionaiy of the Holy Bible, 

For general use in the study of the Scriptures, with fire Maps, 
Ghronoloffical and other Tables, andtwo hundred and fifty Engray- 
ings. 634pages, large 12ma 

Bible Atlas and Gazetteer, 
Boyal octaro, 32 pages, with six fine maps, a list of all the geo- 
graphical names in Scripture, and Yaluable Tables. 

Ornden's Oondensed Oonooidance. 
A fine edition. 561 pages, 8to. 

Locke's Cknnmonplaoe-Book to the Holy Bible. 
^2 pages Sto. 

The Bible Text-Book, 
Or the principal Texts relating to the Persons, Places, and Sub- 
jects occurring in the Holy Scriptures. Ck)lored Maps, and TaBles. 
280 pages, 18ma 

Tenth's Bible Studies, 
Complete in six parts. Part L The Pentateuch. IL Historical 
Books, m. The Prophets. IV. Poetical Books. Y. The Gospels. 
YL The Acts, Episties, etc In a set with case. 

Oallandet's Tenth's Soriptnie Biography, 
Complete in eleven volumes. 49 Engravings. In a case. 

Pabliflhed and for sale by the Aickbicak Tbaot Societt, 150 Naaaau-streei 
New York; Boston, 40 ComhiU; Bocbxsteb, 76 State-street; Fhii.adslphia, 
939 Chestnut-street; Balumobb, 73 West-Fayette-street; Cznginnati, 163 Wal- 
nnt-street; Ohigago, 170 dark-street; St. Louis, 9 South-IlfthHrtreet; and to 
be had of the principal booksellers. ^ 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



