.C»<t>, 




M 
™ 



THE 



YOUNG CHEISTIAN MERCHANT. 

A MEMOIR 

OF 

GEORGE W. BLAKE, 

LATE OF BUENOS AYEES, S. A. 



»ILED CHIEFLY FROM HIS JOURNAL AND LETTERS, 
BY HIS SISTER. 



PUBLISHED BY THE 

/MERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

28 CORNHILL, BOSTON. 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by the 

AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY, 

In the Gerk's Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 



EI.ECTR0TTPED AT THE 
(OSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY. 



TO THE 

JTEG>HEW8 

OP THB 

YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT, 

WHOSE MEMOIR IS HERE GIVEN, 

E^ls WBfsxt IS Knscrrbeti 

THAT THE SAME DILIGENCE IN BUSINESS AND FERVOR OF 

SPIRIT, WHICH HE EXHIBITED, MAY ANIMATE THEM IN 

THEIR PATH THROUGH LIFE, IS THE EARNEST 

DESIRE OF THEIR AFFECTIONATE 

RELATIVE, 

THE AUTHOE. 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2009 with funding from 

Boston Library Consortium IVIember Libraries 



http://www.archive.org/details/youngchristianmeOOblak , 

i 



PKEFACE. 



Several reasons have led to the publication of 
this memoir. First : The uniform and consistent piety 
of the subject, the exhibition of which, it is believed, 
will refresh and encourage Christians. Second : The 
great variety of incident which abounded in his life, 
making, it is thought, an interesting volume for the 
general reader. Third : Although many interesting 
memoirs of pious young women have appeared within 
a few years, the memoirs of pious young men are rare. 
It is hoped and believed that this example of Chris- 
tian character may have a favorable influence on 
young men in business. 

Young persons, reading the biography of ministers 
and others who lived surrounded by a religious atmos- 
phere, are apt to say, " We expect such persons to be 
devoted Christians ; but how are young men, who go 
abroad in the world, exposed to all the multiplied 
temptations of the times, to pass through the fire with 
their garments unchanged ? " In the narrative which 
follows, we see an example of one who encountered 
all these difficulties, and who was enabled, through 
grace, to overcome them. As an example, therefore, 
to those in like circumstances of trial, these pages are 
submitted^ with the hope that they may prove a true 
incentive to high Christian character. 

(5) 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Page 
Birth. — Parentage. — Early Childhood.— Goes to Boston. ... 9 

CHAPTER II. 
Voyage to Rio Janeiro and West Indies. — Death of his Mother. — 
Letters to his Twin Brother 14 

CHAPTER III. 

Goes to Savannah. — Stagnation in Business. — Letter to Twin 
Brother on the Results of the Voyage. — Deep Interest in Reli- 
gion.— Letter to Sister in K. — Hopeful State of Mind. — Sails 
to Europe. — Letter from Rotterdam. — Letter from Antwerp. — 
Remarkable Interposition of Providence, — Letter to Twin 
Brother. 26 

CHAPTER IV. 

Journal. — Rules for Self-government. — Letters. — Solemn Cove- 
nant 37 

CHAPTER V. 

Leaves Boston for Savannah. — Letters and Journal. — Picture of 
Mercantile Life. — Incidents in the Cotton Trade. — Goes on 
Business into the Interior of the State. — Interview with a 
Slave. — View of Theatrical Amusements 47 

CHAPTER VI. 
Journal.— Death of an Infant Slave. — Leaves Savannah for Bos- 
ton.- Holy Aspirations. — Letter to youngest Brother. — Unites 
with Old South Church, Boston. — Struggles against Natural 
Temperament. — Great Depression of Spirits. — Letter to Broth- 
er and Sister in New York. — Rise and Progress of Revival in 
Boston. — Letter to Brother John. — Anxiety about Earthly 
Prospects.- Letter to Sabbath School Scholar. — Formal Rea- 
sons for writing it 65 

(6) 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Page 

Decides to leave Boston for West Indies. — Letters to Brothers. — 
Voyage to St. Domingo. — Letter to Sister in K. — Scenes in the 
City. — Sunday in the City. — Lines on Fruits of Canaan. — 
Disagreeable Detention. — Favorable Specimen of Papal Reli- 
gion. — Letter to Brother in Boston. — Unpleasant Voyage to 
Jacmel. — No Christian Friends. — Letter to Twin Brother. — 
Numerous Temptations.— Firm Trust in God 70 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Port au Prince. — A Case of Sickness, — Returns to Boston.— 
Letter to youngest Brother, in Yale College. — Sails for Buenos 
Ayres. — Journal at Sea. — Severe Gales. — Letter to Father. — 
Picture of Romanism. — Letter to Brother and Sister. — Strug- 
gles against Temptations. — Letter to Brother in Yale College. 
— Disturbed State of the City.— Solitarmess 99 

CHAPTER IX. 

Letters to his Brothers. — Some Hope of Revival. — Letter to his 
Sister in K. — Strong Faith. — Extracts from Letters. — Goes 
up the River Uruguay. — Letter to his Sister. — Letter to 
youngest Brother 120 

CHAPTER X. 

Journal at Monte Video. — Dearth of Religious Privileges. — Re- 
turns to the United States. — Tour to the "Western States. — 
Letters. — Uncertainty in Regard to his future Course. — Leaves 
Boston for Buenos Ayres 138 

CHAPTER XI. 
Voyage to Rio Janeiro. — Letter to his Brother in Boston. — Sick- 
ness, and Depression of Spirits.— Visit to Burial Place. — 
Death of a Young Countryman. — Awful Death of Eighty-four 
Patagonians. — Death of a Young Man. — Case of Elderly 
Countryman 158 

CHAPTER XII. 

Conversation with Companions. — A Holy Life necessary to Use- 
fulness.— Card Playing. — New Consecration. — Severe Sick- 
ness. — State of the Country. — Views and Feelings under Re- 
verses. — Anxiety for a Friend 184 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Page 

Voyage to the United States. — In Boston. — Letter to his Sister 
in K. — Letter to his youngest Brother — Journal of a Voyage 
up the Mississippi to Natchez. — Sabbath Visiting. — Extracts 
from Letters to his Brothers. — Incidents. — Cemetery in New 
Orleans. — Returns to Boston. — Death of his Uncle 201 

V CHAPTER XIV. 

Letter to his Sister in Keene. — Voyage to New Orleans. — Ship- 
wreck. — Letter from New York to his Sister in Keene. — Mar- 
riage, and Arrangements for Sailing to Buenos Ayres 220 

CHAPTER XV. 

Journal of Third and Last Voyage to Buenos Ayres. — Commu- 
nication to Boston Recorder. — North and South America con- 
trasted. — Letter to his youngest Sister. — French Infidelity. — 
Letter from the " Pampas." 244 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Letter to Brother in New York. — To Twin Brother. — Letters 
to Editor of Boston Recorder. — To Mr. and Mrs. B., of Han- 
cock, N. H. — Letters to Father and Sister. — To his Wife from 
Monte Video. — To Twin Brother. — To Boston Recorder. — 
To his Brother-in-Law in Hancock. — Last Letter to his Father. 267 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Death of Mr. Blake. — Letter from Mrs. Blake. — Letter from 
Rev. Mr. Norris. — Inscription on Gravestone 290 



THE 



YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER I. 

Birth. — Parentage. — Early Childhood. — Goes to Boston. 

George Washington Blake was the sixth 
son of Elihu and Elizabeth Whitney Blake, of 
Westboro', Massachusetts. He was born Jan- 
uary 11, 1808. 

Mr. and Mrs. Blake had thirteen children, 
eleven of whom — eight sons and three daugh- 
ters — grew up to maturity. George, as well as 
the others, owed much to the good sense, the 
piety, and the prayers of his parents. These 
parents became members of the Congregational 
church in Westboro', in the early part of their 
married life; and the elder children do not 
remember the time when family prayer was not 
observed, although often in the morning amid 
pressing cares, and sometimes with great weari- 
ness at night. In these prayers, the children, 

(9) 



10 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT." 

at home and abroad, were always remembered 
with especial fervor. Conversation on the things 
of religion was as household words; and the 
youngest son, now a preacher of the gospel, 
when asked what first led him to a religious 
course, is known to have said, " It was the con- 
versation of my father and mother, who always 
spoke of these things as settled realities, on 
which they raised no doubting questions." 

These particulars will show what were some 
of the influences under which George was 
reared. His mother was the only sister of 
the late Eli Whitney, the ingenious inventor 
of the cotton gin. She, too, possessed much 
of that ingenuity so available in the mother 
of a large family with limited means. She 
was a woman of enlarged views and good 
judgment. The father of George was a, 
man of exemplary piety, great industry and 
ingenuity, and much natural refinement. Al- 
though his means for an early education were 
limited to the common school, he was always 
fond of improvement, and loved books and 
reading. The town of Westboro' possessed 
a respectable library, of whfSli he was one 
of the projectors, and was many years clerk 
of the Library Society, which held for a time 
stated meetings, as a means of improvement. 
With the help of a very neat artificial globe of 



CHILDHOOD. 11 

his own construction, Mr. B. gave his elder chil- 
dren their first ideas of astronomy and geog- 
raphy. 

It was a great object with the parents of 
George to furnish their children with regular 
employment. Once, when a neighboring lad 
was present, who unfortunately had nothing to 
do at home, and whose frequent visits interfered 
with the business hours of the boys, Mrs. B., 
whose patience had become exhausted, requested 
him to go home, and read the seventeenth verse 
of the twenty-fifth chapter of Proverbs.* 

Mrs. Blake's rebuke will be thought very 
excusable by many parents who have been 
utterly foiled in their attempts to efiect the sys- 
tematic instruction and training of their fam- 
ilies, by the unseasonable visits of imrestrained 
children. 

But these boys had still an abundance of 
time for recreation and amusement. The gar- 
den, the orchard, and the yard furnished ample 
playground ; and they were never expected, nor 
did they expect, to visit the inclosures of the 
neighbors without leave. This was not felt as 
an uncomfortable restriction, since they had 
been trained to these habits from the first. • 

Little is recollected of the early childhood of 

* " Refrain thy foot from thy neighbor's house, lest he be weary of 
thee, and so hate thee." 



12 THE YOUNG CHEISTIAN MERCHANT. 

George, except that he had a peculiar aptness 
for answering questions in mental arithmetic. 
His older brothers used often, when the hands 
of all were employed about their usual avoca- 
tions, to ply him with such questions, and they 
were surprised to find with what rapidity his' 
mind operated and brought out the result. 

George had a twin brother, and the two, as 
was natural, were objects of some special interest 
in the family, and among their friends. At nine 
years of age these boys joined the Sabbath 
school, which had been commenced in that town 
in 181T. This school was one of the first formed 
in the state. The proposal of some young per- 
sons to commence such a school was not only 
opposed by those who disliked every religious 
movement, but by a few good people. Notwith- 
standing the obstacles thrown in their way, how- 
ever, the young ladies who projected it, having 
the countenance and approbation of their min- 
ister,* commenced the enterprise ; and it pros- 
pered surprisingly. Many have reason to bless 
God for impressions received during some of 
the first months of its existence. George was 
interested and regular in his attendance, and in 
preparation for the exercises of the school. 

In April, 1825, at the age of seventeen, he left 

* The Kev. Elisha Rockwood, D. D., at that time pastor of the 
church iu Westboro'. 



CLERKSHIP — VOYAGES. IS 

home for Boston, and entered the counting room 
of his maternal uncle, J. Whitney, then located 
on Long Wharf, afterward on India Wharf. 
Mr. Whitney was an importer and wholesale 
merchant, engaged chiefly in the coasting trade 
between Savannah and Boston, but making fre- 
quent shipments also to Buenos Ayres and other 
South American, as well as European ports. 

On these voyages George not unfrequently 
went, as clerk and assistant to the captain, in 
which voyages he enlarged his knowledge of the 
world and of commercial usages. He usually 
had also an opportunity of carrying out some 
" venture " for himself. An older brother of 
George had been employed in this mercantile 
house with Mr. W. about six years. Tlius 
George commenced his commercial career under 
favorable auspices for gainmg a thorough knowl- 
edge of business. 



14 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER II. 

Voyage to Rio Janeiro and West Indies. — Death of his Mother.-^ 
Letters to his twin Brother. 

It is intended that the subject of this me- 
moir shall speak in these pages as far as possible 
for himself. We shall therefore make copious 
extracts from his letters, of which many remain, 
and from a journal kept by him during the most 
important part of his life. 

At the age of eighteen, in the year 1826, 
Mr. Blake went to Rio Janeiro and the West 
Indies, as clerk to the captain of one of his 
uncle's vessels, during which time his mother 
died. We have the following letters, written on 
his return to his twin brother, then in New Ha- 
ven, Connecticut, in respect to the event. 

Boston, May 8, 1827. 

Dear Brother John : I arrived in this place 
yesterday from St. Thomas, and for the first 
time heard the unwelcome tidings of my 
mother's death. It was commu.nicated by 
brother J., before I landed, and I assure you it 



LETTER TO HIS BROTHER. 15 

was as painful as it was sudden ; and I feel a large 
share of the heavy stroke it has been to our fam- 
ily. But though I grieve and mourn the loss of 
one so near and affectionate, yet I feel a certain 
joy in the hope that my loss is all her gain. 
I am very thankful that our mother was spared 
to us so long, and I hope that her death may 
be a means of good to us. I am so distressed 
in thinking of it that I can not say half I would ; 
and with my present feelings, I can tell you 
nothing about my voyage. 

The account of this voyage to Rio Janeiro 
was afterward sent to the same brother, ac- 
companied by a chart exhibiting the track of 
the vessel in which he sailed. This chart is 
very neatly drawn, and, with the whole man- 
uscript, does credit to the industry and taste of 
the writer. And as this letter describes his first 
experience in a merchant vessel, we give it en- 
tire. It' is interesting also to observe how he 
employed his leisure in those foreign ports ; and 
how, by such habits of observation, he was treas- 
uring up useful knowledge. 

Boston, June 12, 1827. 

Dear Brother John : During my absence I 
kept a journal of my proceedings, addressed to 
you; but I find it not very legibly written, 



16 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

and have therefore made some extracts from it, 
which may interest you, as you requested some 
account of my voyage. 

I sailed from Boston Dec. 7, 1826, and in 
about fifteen days arrived off the Azores ; 
crossed the Tropic of Cancer Jan. 1 ; the Equa- 
tor on the 19th ; and arrived safe at Kio Janeiro 
Feb. 2, after a pleasant passage of fifty-seven 
days. I was seasick about fifteen days ; this 
took off my flesh, and reduced me much ; but 
after this was over, my appetite returned, and 
I soon regained my flesh and strength. 

At Rio Janeiro the cargo was sold ; and after 
a stay of three weeks we took in ballast, and the 
proceeds of the cargo in doubloons, and sailed 
for Pernambuco, a port situated in eight degrees 
south latitude on the coast of Brazil, resolving, 
if possible, to obtain a freight to some port of 
Europe or the United States, or to invest the 
funds in produce, should the markets be favor- 
able, and return home. 

We arrived at Pernambuco March 13, after a 
passage of eighteen days ; but finding no freight 
to be had there, and the markets unfavorable, 
we sailed the next day for Port Royal in the 
West Indies ; but finding no better success 
there, we spent but one day and left for Santa 
Cruz, where we arrived April 3. The captain 
landed, and hearing that coffee was low at St. 



DESCRIPTION OF RIO JANEIRO. 17 

Thomas, he resolved to go over there and invest 
the funds. We arrived in the harbor the same 
day at evening ; purchased about four hundred 
bags of coffee ; and on the 15th sailed for Bos- 
ton. When we arrived as far north as thirty-five 
degrees, we experienced a severe gale of wind 
(April 15) from the north-west, which lasted 
nine days. During this time we were driven 
out of our course, and made no progress toward 
home. 

The Almira proved herself a good sea boat, by 
riding out the storm in safety ; although it was 
done with a good deal of straining. I arrived 
in Boston May 7, twentyHwo days from St. 
Thomas, having been absent five months. 

Rio Janeiro, (in English, River of January,) 
the capital of the Brazilian empire, is situated 
on a deep bay, about fifteen miles from the sea. 
It is laid out very regularly, mostly on level 
ground, but is surrounded by very high moun- 
tains, some of which are remarkable on account 
of their form, hight, and situation. Some of 
them seem to tower to the heavens, and are so 
steep as to be inaccessible to the foot of man. 
Some form precipices many hundreds of feet in 
hight. The scenery is very beautiful in sailing 
up this harbor. The grandeur of the mountains, 
with their green appearance, and the forts, (nine 
in all,) situated on each side of the bay, give 
2 



18 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

the place a very imposing appearance, and strike 
the stranger with admiration. 

■ The city contains about three hundred thou- 
sand inhabitants, descendants of Portuguese, 
French, English, Americans, and negroes. 
Some of the streets are very handsome. The 
houses are built of stone, and being plastered 
and whitewashed, make a very good appear- 
ance. The public buildings are some beautiful 
churches, the palace, arsenal, convents, &c. The 
bells upon these convents chime sweetly for mass 
in the morning, and for vespers in the evening. 

But while there is so much to admire here, it 
is shocking to see the effects of slavery; the 
traffic in slaves being carried on here to the 
greatest extent, vessels arriving almost every 
day with poor natives of Africa, doomed to a 
life of servitude. Nothing is more common in 
the streets than to see these wretched beings 
chained, nine or ten together, carrying water, 
whose very chains (so large and heavy) seem 
load enough. 

The Sabbath here is spent as a holiday ; and 
all kinds of gaming and diversions are going on. 
Most of the shops are kept open all day for 
trading. The churches are open, and the people 
assemble about twenty minutes in the morning, 
and about half an hour in the evening. Their 
religion is Roman Catholic, as you know, and 



PEDRO I. 19 

they are extremely bigoted and superstitious. 
If, in passing one of their processions, one did 
not uncover his head and cross himself, he was 
sure to be knocked down by some of the priests, 
so fearful are they of offending the Virgin by 
letting a heretic pass without paying some mark 
of adoration. 

I once had an opportunity of seeing the Em- 
peror, Pedro I. He was getting into his coach 
at the palace. As he immediately drove off, I 
had but a moment to observe his Imperial High- 
ness. He is about the middle size, stout, and 
very well formed, wears mustaches, which give 
him, with his uniform, a bold, military appear- 
ance. He comes into the city in a coach drawn 
by eight or ten mules, attended by about forty 
men, mounted as guards, who ride in the rear. 
He enters by a certain street, through which no 
-carriage but his own is allowed to pass. When 
he alights from his coach, every person present 
must doff his hat, if he values his peace. An 
English captain, who from ignorance or disin- 
clination neglected this ceremony, was knocked 
down and beaten most severely by one of the 
guards, very much to the annoyance and morti- 
fication of John Bull. The emperor is not very 
popular here. His brutal and unbecoming be- 
havior has of late caused him to be much less 
esteemed among his subjects. A report was in 



20 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

circulation that his wife died in consequence of 
a blow received from him in a passion. 

Every thing here is in a disturbed state, in 
consequence of the war in which the country is 
engaged. This war has been carried on so long 
that the national fund is nearly exhausted; 
their troops, from poor pay and bad manage- 
ment, are desertmg ; and in trying to raise a 
new army, every poor man they can find is im- 
pressed. After the death of the empress, the 
emperor dismissed all his old ministers, and 
took new ones, because his old ones had ex- 
pressed some disgust at his behavior, and did not 
pay sufficient respect to his mistress, whom he 
intended soon to marry. This circumstance 
caused many of his subjects to dislike him ; and 
it is the opinion of foreigners residing here that 
there will soon be a revolution. 

Rio is a place of great trade. All European 
nations traffic here, and some few of every na- 
tion reside here. The principal exports are 
rice, coffee, cotton, and sugar. 

At Pernambuco, my stay was only one day. 
This city is situated very pleasantly on the open 
sea coast, and enjoys the advantage of a cool 
sea breeze, which keeps it healthy all the year. 
It contains about fifty thousand people, a large 
proportion of whom are slaves. It is laid out 
irregularly, the streets being very narrow, and 



OLINDA — PORT ROYAL. 21 

some of them dirty. The houses are built in 
the same manner as at Rio. Few Americans 
reside here. The suburbs of the city are very 
pleasant. There are no high mountains, and 
most of the land is cultivated. There are some 
fine gardens, where the best of watermelons and 
muskmelons are raised. They have here, as at 
Rio, peaches, grapes, cocoanuts, oranges, lemons, 
and all the tropical fruits in abundance. 

The town of Olinda is situated on a hill, 
about three miles from Pernambuco. Here 
there is a college, and other fine buildings, which 
I had not time to visit. It is a very pleasant 
place, and makes a fine appearance from the 
sea and from Pernambuco. 

Port Royal is the capital of Martinico, which, 
with the Island of St. Lucie, belongs to France. 
There are here about eight thousand people, 
principally French. They carry on a consid- 
erable trade with France, and with the United 
States. It is regularly laid out in streets, which 
are kept quite clean. The place is well fortified, 
having a large fort, well filled with soldiers and 
guns. Beside these, several ships of war are 
lying in the harbor. There is a large town 
about twelve miles from this place, called St. 
Pierre, which has more trade than Port Royal. 
We passed by this place, but it was evening, and 
we could see nothing but the lights. 



22 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

In sailing to Santa Cruz, we saw several other 
of the West India Islands, viz., Dominica, Gua- 
daloupe, Montserat, St. Kitts, and St. Eustatie. 
At St. Thomas I remained about twelve days. 
It is a small, barren island, which has a city of 
about fifty thousand people. It belongs to the 
Danes. The King of Denmark has made it a 
free port, which renders it a resort for vessels of 
every nation trading to the West Indies. It is 
situated on the south side of the island, at the 
foot of some very high hills, and is consequently 
hot and unhealthy at some seasons of the year. 
When I was there, the small pox was prevailing 
to a great extent ; and it was not uncommon to 
see people walking the streets who had not 
recovered from it. Many labels were affixed to 
the houses — " Small pox here " — in different 
languages, English, French, Danish, and Spanish. 

In September, 1827, Mr. Blake, with a 
younger brother, visited Keene, New Hampshire, 
where he had spent some part of his childhood ; 
and Hancock, in the same state, where one of 
his sisters, wife of the late Rev. Archibald Bur- 
gess, resided. 

During this visit among the " granite hills," 
he speaks in no measured terms of the scenery, 
showing, as he ever did, a strong sense of the 
beautiful in nature. In a letter to his brother 



VISIT TO NEW HAMPSHIRE. 23 

John he writes, " We could not present our- 
selves at the house until we had stopped to ad- 
mire the situation. In front, looking below, we 
had a delightful ^dew of the whole village. The 
church spire rose in the midst, overtopping the 
surrounding houses, while we were far above the 
glittering vane that turned upon its summit. 
Looking beyond, hill after hill rose to our view, 
until the sight rested' on the largest in the dis- 
tance. A little to the left of these lay the huge 
Monadnock, which, from its size, seemed to be 
the father of the surrounding hills. Between 
could be seen deep winding valleys, where twi- 
light loves to linger, and where some stream 
glides along, collecting the waters from springs 
upon the adjacent hills. I admired the spot, 
but did not long stay to admire. Going into the 
house, we were warmly greeted by sister M., to 
whom we came unexpectedly. Since I left Bos- 
ton the weather had been very fine, and that 
evening was peculiarly pleasant to me. The 
moon shone very brightly, the horizon was clear, 
and every star above the hills was visible. To 
add to the pleasure of such a scene, we were 
enjoying the company of kind friends. Every 
thing was still, and it seemed so different from 
passing an evening in the city ! It brought to 
my mind the following lines from the Minstrel, 
which seemed exactly suited to the occasion : — 



24 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

♦ No cloud obscures the starry void ; 

The yellow moonlight sleeps on all the hills ; 
Nor is the mind with startling sounds annoyed. 
A soothing murmur the lone region fills, 
Of groves, and dying gales, and melancholy riUs.* 

" Now and then the sound of the bugle and the 
French horn reached us from the village below. 
This was so delightful that we were all drawn 
out of the door to listen. They were probably 
tuning their instruments for a regimental mus- 
ter, which we learned was to take place the 
next day. 

" We left on Wednesday morning, and arrived 
at Westboro' in the evening, where I staid a 
few days, and then returned to Boston, having 
been absent two weeks." 

During the succeeding winter, our young 
friend became much interested in the study of 
music, and to some extent a proficient in it, 
which was often undoubtedly a solace to him in 
his separations from friends and country. 

He had also a taste for drawing ; and although 
he had no claim to artistic skill, yet the em- 
ployment interested him, and occupied some of 
his leisure hours. Many scenes in South Amer- 
ica were sketched by his pencil for the gratifica- 
tion of his friends. These pursuits, with his 
love of writing and reading, brought to his even- 



RECREATIONS. 26 

ing leisure some pleasant recreations. How 
desirable that young men should cultivate in 
themselves a taste for these pursuits ! What a 
safeguard to virtue would they prove in early 
life, and how many pleasant and delightful 
evenings might be thus spent, improving to the 
mind and to the moral character, and leaving no 
room for those debasing pursuits which are the 
ruin of so many ! 



THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER III. 



Goes to Savannah. — Stagnation in Business. — Letter to Twin 
Brother on the Results of the Voyage. — Deep Interest in Eeli- 
gion. — Letter to Sister in K. — Hopeful State of Mind. — Sails 
to Europe. — Letter from Rotterdam. — Letter from Antwerp. — 
Remarkable Literposition of Providence. — Letter to Tv/in 
Brother. 



On the 5th of January, 1828, Mr. Blake sailed 
for Savannah. He had some adventure of his 
own in the vessel, and some freight committed 
to him for sale. During the five weeks of his 
stay in that city, he lived on board tho ship. He 
thus writes to his brother in Boston : " Every 
thing is dull ; there is nothing to do. I have 
heard all the captain's long stories; and if I 
should be here four weeks more, I should hear 
them as many times over; and as you have 
probably heard them not less frequently, you 
can judge of the pleasure with which I listen to 
them. The mate is full of oaths, and has be- 
come an infidel, from reading the works of Tom 
^Paine ; and now his greatest pleasure is in rid- 
iculing all sentiments that differ from his far 
vorite author's. We are on good terms, however, 
and I do not let him know that he hurts my 



LETTER TO HIS BROTHER. 27 

feelings by his talk. By taking a book, and 
straying out of the city to a retired spot to which 
I sometimes resort, I can enjoy a few hours of 
uninterrupted peace ; and this is my only refuge 
from the annoyance." 

On his return from this voyage, Mr. Blake 
writes as follows to his brother John at New 
Haven : — 

Boston, March 22, 1828. 

Dear Brother J. : Although we have been 
separated for three years, we are still twin 
brothers. Wherever I am, whether near or in 
far distant lands, be assured that I have you fre- 
quently in my mind ; and often a sigh escapes 
me that we are thus doomed to be kept apart. 
But I hope the bitterness of the separation will 
be relieved by frequent letters between us. 

On my voyage to Savannah, while off Cape 
Fear, the anniversary of our birth occurred. I 
recalled many of the circumstances of our past 
lives, and I had many wishes for your prosperity 
and happiness. 

I arrived at Savannah Feb. 21. The weather 
was mild, and green peas, radishes, and other 
vegetables were plenty in the market. Orange r 
and lemon trees were in bloom. The rose 
multiflora and jasmin were diffusing their fra- 
grance. I enjoyed many things, but the dull- 
ness of the time for business was discouraging to 



28 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

me. I have returned here without making a 
cent, and shall probably lose in the end. I am 
often perplexed in thinking of my prospects. I 
wish to get settled in something ; but having no 
capital, I am under a disadvantage. Perhaps I 
feel more anxious than I ought to feel, since 
there is a good and wise Providence who over- 
rules all things, and no doubt will do that in 
the end which is best for me ; and it is our duty 
to submit. 

Thirteen days' passage to Boston, with a sea as 
rough as you can imagine, storm after storm, 
gale after gale, with our vessel rolling, tumbling, 
pitching, and banging about, wound up my trip, 
and put a stop to the almost insufferable sea- 
sickness that I endured on my passage home. 

The death of E. P. Rockwood * was very sud- 
den and unexpected to me. I saw it first men- 
tioned in a northern paper, in a reading room 
in Savannah. He had written me, about six 
weeks before, a long letter, which I had very 
recently answered. It must even be so, that 
while some are enjoying life and its blessings, 
others will be suddenly carried off by the cold 
hand of death ; and no doubt it is so ordained 
as a warning to the living, that all may see the 
uncertainty of life, and be prepared against the 
solemn hour that they shall be summoned to 

* An early friend— son of Rev. Mr, Rockwood. 



VIEWS OF RELIGION. 29 

depart. It is certainly a fearful thing to think 
seriously of death as close to us. It becomes us 
to inquire of ourselves whether we are fit to die ; 
and I have frequently put the question to my- 
self, but I can not answer it as I would wish to. 

Brother J has recently been admitted as 

a member of Park Street church, of which Rev. 
Edward Beecher is pastor, and has expressed a 
wish that I also would unite with the church ; 
but as I did not give him any encouragement to 
think that I would at present, he esteems my 
religion as rather cold. I love religion, and es- 
teem it as one of the brightest ornaments that 
mankind can put on — a thing which two years 
ago I thought as of no use. And if my reli- 
gion is cold now, I trust and pray to my Creator 
that my love to him may become warmer, and 
that I may advance in spiritual improvement. 
Nor do I forget you in my supplications at the 
throne of grace. And while I ask for your 
prosperity in this world, I forget not to add a 
petition that we may both be foimd worthy of 
an inheritance in a better. Will you not add 
your prayers to the same effect ? Ours together 
may do much more than all my feeble efforts 
alone. Will you not also write me what you 
think of this subject ? 

Again he writes, two months later : — 



30 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Boston, June 2. 

Dear Brother John : I received your agree- 
able letter dated May — . I rejoice that you 
have found the Saviour so precious, and I mourn 
that I am still wandering without him. You 
say, if I knew the worth of my own soul, I 
should not rest. I assure you, I wish to know. 
I read the Scriptures, and meditate, using all 
the powers of my imagination to set before my- 
self the danger of living a life of sin ; the pains 
of hell on the one side, and the unspeakable 
pleasure of walking in the path of duty under 
the guidance of the Lord, and the pleasures of 
heaven, on the other. I inquire of Christians, 
and I pray, upon my knees, that the Saviour 
may be revealed to me, that I may feel a deep 
sense of sin ; that I may be forgiven ; and that 
I may, by the grace of God, become a Christian. 
But I have no help as yet. I am not in a happy 
state of mind now, nor have I been so for three 
weeks. I have sometimes been tempted to give 
up my case as hopeless ; but I have persevered 
for a long time. Is it because I am not sincere ? 
Certainly, if I know my own heart, that can not 
be. Is it because I am not prayerful enough ? 
Surely I come often before my God. Can it be 
that I am destined to be a castaway ? No ; for 
the Saviour has said that those who come unto 
him he will in no wise cast out. Then why is 



DESPONDENCY. 31 

it ? It must be because I do not love God su- 
premely. But it is my earnest prayer that I 
may be quickened to this love. 

Now, John, the fact is, I am not a Christian. 
I have not experienced the happy change that 
you have. And as you have passed the strait 
gate, and have been enabled to feel the divine 
influences of the Sa\aour's love, you must in- 
tercede for me. Your prayers may be heard, 
and I may feel their happy effects. I must be a 
Christian. I have vowed that I would be ; and 
if you can help me, you must ; and assist me, 
ere I sink into fatal despondency, and it be for 
ever too late. 

As to the state of religion here, the Spirit 
appears to have gone forth and awakened a few 
careless sinners like myself, who are inquiring. 
At the meeting which I attend for tliis purpose, 
there are between thirty and forty present. 
While you and E. are rejoicing in hope, do not 
forget me in your prayers. 

The following extract of a letter to his sister 
in K., dated July 5, shows that his mind was 
hopeful, that the conflict had subsided, and that 
he had become in a measure established. After 
answering inquiries respecting his boarding 
place, <fec., he says, " I assure you that I 
feel a deep interest in religion. I participate in 



32 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

the pleasure you feel in consequence. Our 
brothers having chosen, as we trust, the good 
part which shall never be taken away, I humbly 
hope God will, in his infinite mercy, permit me 
also to meet with you and them, to sing praises 
in heaven ; and although I am wholly un- 
worthy, the Saviour has said that he would 
receive all that would come to him. To him I 
do endeavor to come. May God hear your sup- 
plications in my behalf." 

On the 14th of February, the following year, 
he sailed for Rotterdam, with the object in view 
of becoming acquainted with the country, and 
perhaps, by a few months in a counting house 
there, to acquire information respecting business 
usages in Holland. He took with him letters 
from Mr. W. to commercial agents in Rotter- 
dam. The idea, however, of remaining, he was 
led to abandon soon after his arrival. He 
writes to his brother in Boston : — 

KoTTERDAM, April 9, 1829. 

Dear Brother : A kind Providence has pre- 
served me during a tempestuous voyage, and I 
am happy to inform you of my safe arrival here, 
after a period of fifty days spent upon the water. 
The length of time made it extremely tedious, 
and the many trials we met with required, and 



LETTER PROM ANTWERP. 33 

nearly exhausted, all our patience. Neverthe- 
less, the goodness of God was visibly manifested 
toward us ; and while I looked to him for 
strength to meet all his dispensations, I doubted 
not that he was ordering all things for the best. 
And when I think of the dangers we have es- 
caped, I feel that I have much cause for grat- 
itude. 

From Antwerp he writes : — 

April 22. 

Dear Brother: I have now retired to my 
room, and it is ten o'clock, evening. I have 
just left the company of eight or ten shipmasters, 
who are trying an old Bath captain for misde- 
meanors. He was sentenced to pay a fine of a 
half dozen bottles of champagne ; and though 
I was urged strongly to stay and partake of the 
wine, I came away to write to you, und to enjoy 
the pleasure of retirement. 

You can not tell with what joy I get away 
from noise and bustle to the silent room, where 
I can thank my heavenly Father for all his mer- 
cies, and seek new strength to keep from sin 
and folly. This is seldom, and it makes me 
think more of the time when I shall see beloved 
America, and again enjoy her blessed privileges. 

Could I find but one single soul whose feel- 
ings were similar to mine, with whom I could 
3 



34 • THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

sympathize and converse freely upon those im- 
portant subjects which involve our future peace, 
it would give me great joy. But alas ! my com- 
panions are only those who trifle with serious 
things. 

To his father he writes : • — 

April 30. 

Dear Father : You have no doubt ere this 
heard through Brother J. of my safe arrival in 
Europe after a long and rough passage. * * * 
I have visited the cities of Amsterdam, Leyden, 
Hague, Haerlem, Antwerp, Dort, and several 
towns and places of less note, and would give 
you a brief description of these cities, but must 
defer it to a future period, when I have more 
time. 

During a short journey last week, an incident 
occurred from which I escaped with my life only 
through the goodness of divine Providence. 
When ready to leave Antwerp for Rotterdam, I 
had almost concluded to return by the stage 
coach or diligence. But afterwards, for some 
trifling reason, I changed my mind, and took the 
-steamboat, which brought me safely. The dil- 
igence had started a few hours before the steam- 
boat, and had arrived safely as far as the city of 
Breda ; but when going out of that city, with 
fifteen passengers, it had but just left the gate 



ESCAFE FROM DEATH. 35 

when by some accident it was thrown from the 
ramparts into the broad ditch which surrounds 
the city. It was dark, and before any assistance 
could be obtained, ten persons were drowned. 
None of the horses attached to the coach could 
be saved. 

The news of the disaster had reached Rotter- 
dam before I arrived, and my friends here, 
knowing my intention to return that day, feared 
that I might be one of the unfortunate suf- 
ferers. All are now congratulating me on my 
" fortunate escape," while I can only attribute it 
to the merciful interposition of God. 

To his twin brother he writes under same 
date. After mentioning the above circumstance, 
he remarks, " I can not but give thanks to him 
who has spared my life and returned me in 
safety to Rotterdam. I should like to hear how 
you and brother E. progress in your studies at 
Hamilton, and wish I might be in the way of 
improving in learning with you ; for I assure 
you, I very much feel the need of it. My little 
stock of knowledge shows me my great stock of 
ignorance ; and where I need to know much, I 
know comparatively nothing. Could I speak well 
some of the European languages, it would be of 
much use to me at present. During my passage 
out here, I applied myself to the study of French, 



36 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

and learned just enough to get along without 
getting my head broken, as I heard some one 
remark about his knowledge of the Dutch 
tongue, the other day. 

" Of Spanish and Portuguese I know but little 
more. I intend to study the Spanish during my 
passage home, as I have the books necessary, and 
I like the language. As I have no tutor, I ex- 
pect my proficiency will be small. I should like 
to have some of your conveniences to take to 
sea with me, such as a teacher and good accom- 
modations." 

Mr. Blake remained in Holland about three 
weeks, probably returning in the same vessel. 
He arrived in Boston, by way of New York, 
about the first of July. Here he was employed 
in the same mercantile house where he had pre- 
viously been engaged. In the mean time he 
appears to have availed himself of all opportuni- 
ties for gaining religious instruction, and to have 
greatly prized them. 



PRIVATE JOURNAL. 3T 



CHAPTER lY. 

Journal. — Rules for Self-government. — Letters. — Solemn Covenant. 

From the private journal of Mr. Blake before 
mentioned, it may be seen whence he derived 
his power to resist temptation, and to overcome 
every wrong propensity. He maintained a con- 
stant intercourse with God, and thus preserved 
his armor bright, and always ready for use in 
his Christian warfare. 

His first entry in his journal is as follows : — 

BosTox, Sept. 8, 1829. 

This day has passed, and while I mourn that 
I have not derived a larger share of benefit, I 
feel that I have great reason to thank God that 
he has preserved me from much evil ; that he 
has saved me from the snares of the world ; and 
notwithstanding I was engaged in much busi- 
ness, I had several intervals in wliich I could 
and did engage in reading the Scriptures and 
prayer. 

9. I wrote early this morning the following 



38 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

rules for the regulation of my conduct before 
men. May God give me grace to keep them. 

1. Ponder before speaking — think to what 
effect. 

2. When others are discussing a subject in 
which I am not particularly interested, never 
join it unless requested. 

3. Never give my opinion unasked. 

4. Never contradict one with whom I am 
conversing, and be extremely careful how I 
make positive assertions. 

5. Be ever careful not to speak ill of the 
absent. 

6. Be ever more inclined to profit by the 
experience of others than to imitate their follies. 

7. Guard against foolish attempts at witty 
expressions in conversation. They are vain and 
useless. 

8. Strive to acquire a regular mode of think- 
ing, and to think of those things which are of 
the most importance. 

9. In all things cherish a cheerful and grate- 
ful heart, and be ever humble. 

September 15 he wrote to a sister-in-law in 
New York — "I do indeed, my dear sister, seek 
divine blessings on all my undertakings. You 
speak of our mother's joy in heaven in behold- 
ing on earth her children ' walking in the truth.' 



INTEREST IN MISSIONS. 39 

If indeed there are so many of us subjects of 
redeeming grace, great is the cause for joy. 
But so deceitful is the human heart, that for 
myself, I feel there is need of striving contin- 
ually, and watching and praying, lest I come 
short of that rest which remaineth for the people 
of God." 

In the journal under date of 24th September, 
he speaks of being present at the ordination 
of fifteen missionaries and evangelists, destined 
principally to labor among the Indians on our 
frontiers. He expresses a cordial interest in the 
cause of missions, and questions his own heart 
as to whether he should not himself engage in 
this work. But he does not at this time seem to 
have been deeply impressed with the feeling that 
it was his duty. 

In looking, however, on his fellow-men in 
their lost state, and in their impending danger, 
he feels impelled to speak to some of those about 
him during the coming week, and he sends up 
the earnest petition that God would enable him 
to do it " meekly, affectionately, and effectually." 

From a succeeding page of his journal, it 
would appear that he was conscious of a pro- 
pensity to spend time in profitless discussion and 
talking. Against this fault he makes strong 
resolutions, and trusts that some progress has 



40 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

been made in the past week by way of amend- 
ment. 

October 4. He appears to have felt the ur- 
gent necessity of improving time to the utmost. 
He had employed his leisure moments in read- 
ing and study ; the books which had occupied 
him being Mrs. Jud son's Life, and the History 
of the Burman Mission, Scott's Life of Napo- 
leon, Watts on the Mind, Kempis' Luitation of 
Christ, and Pollok's Course of Time, (to which 
last he speaks of having made out an index,) 
besides regular portions of Scripture, and the 
study of French. 

The journal continues under date of Octo- 
ber 11 — "I have had some expectation of going 
to Georgia this winter, and have had a desire to 
become a member of the church of Christ ; but 
so uncertain is my destination, and the time of 
my leaving, that I am obliged to delay it for the 
present. And feeling that in my unsettled state 
I should stand much in need of covenant as- 
sistance, I have this day, after much prayer, 
commenced drawing up a secret covenant with 
God, giving myself entirely to Christ, and tak- 
ing him as my Saviour and my portion. 

" May the Almighty assist me to perfect it, 
dictating to me here on the earth, and ratifying 
all in heaven. I purpose this week to make 



STUDY OP LANGUAGES. 41 

new exertions to overcome my sins. Sensible of 
my own weakness, Lord, I look to thee for help." 

To his sister in K. he wrote : — 

October 13. 

Dear Sister : I thank you for your kind 
imitation to spend several weeks with you. 
Nothing would give me greater pleasure. But 
in my present situation, I feel that I have every 
thing to acquire, and no time to lose. Could I 
spare the time to attend to the studies which, as 
you suggest, might be pursued at K., I assure 
you I would not hesitate a moment. 

The French and Spanish languages are very 
important to me, and I am now improving all 
the intervals of time which occur in my business 
to acquire a general knowledge of them. My 
means will not allow me the advantage of a 
teacher in either ; therefore I am under the 
necessity of using double diligence. I know 
that the Latin would be very useful, and wish I 
had time to devote to it, that I might by it ob- 
tain a better knowledge of the English. Had I 
been more ambitious two years ago, I might 
have made considerable proficiency. But it is 
no new thing that persons many times find out 
these things too late. 

In his journal of October 18, Mr. B. manifests 



42 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN BIERCHANT. 

deep seriousness. After some reflections on the 
passing time, he says, " It would seem that if 
men believed that ' time past is gone for ever,' 
they would live differently." Again he says, 
" I have of late had much pleasure in thinking 
of spiritual things ; and I can say that I have 
had more joy in the contemplation of the glories 
of heaven than I should feel in the possession of 
great riches." 

Mr. B.'s plan now was to prepare himself to 
act as a commission merchant and commercial 
agent in distant cities, with the idea of ulti- 
mately settling where he should find an eligible 
opening. His previous training had been well 
adapted to fit him for such a business. 

In pursuance of this plan, he was now on the 
eve of going for a season to Savannah, Georgia. 
In his journal he says, " I have finished, this 
day, drawing up a covenant with Jehovah, and 
ere I leave Boston I intend to sign it." 

The document here referred to was found 
after his death, in a detached form, sealed up 
with the journal. The paper, consisting of sev- 
eral pages, comprised, also, reasons for thus 
covenanting ; and the covenant was preceded 
and followed by a solemn prayer. The reasons 
recorded are as follows : — 

" Having been deprived by my peculiar situa- 



SOLEMN COVENANT. 43 

tion, the past six months, of the opportunity of 
joining tlie church of Christ on earth, and of 
covenanting with him before men, my present 
prospects also appearing very uncertain as to a 
convenient and proper time to do so, it is my 
settled purpose, after seeking prayerfully for 
help, to draw up a covenant in writing between 
the Lord Jehovah and my own sinful self, ac- 
cepting him as my covenant God, and binding 
myself to him in the most solemn manner to 
keep his statutes, to honor his name, and to glo- 
rify him in all things before men." 

Omitting the record of the first prayer, only 
remarking that it seems to breathe the spirit of 
deep and true devotion, we come to the 

COVENANT. 

In thy presence, Lord God, I do now here- 
by give up myself, all that I have, and all that I 
am, to thee, the great and dreadful God, the 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and most sol- 
emnly covenant with thee, as my chief good, 
my Saviour, and my all. Since, in the freeness 
of thy mercy, thou hast offered salvation to all 
who come to thee in and through Jesus Christ, 
and in sincerity of heart accept it, I do now 
offer myself to thee, and accept of the terms 
which thou hast laid down, purposing hereafter 
to make thy law the rule of my life ; to live in 



44 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

thy service ; to take up the cross and follow him 
who has died that I might live ; fighting against 
sin and the corruptions of the flesh, enduring 
shame and persecution for thy sake, putting my 
trust in thee at all times for strength to over- 
come. 

And because all my righteousnesses are as 
filthy rags, I renounce all confidence therein, 
and as a helpless, hopeless, and undone creature, 
I will look for salvation to the merits of Jesus 
Christ alone. Whether in prosperity or in ad- 
versity, I do promise never to depart from thee ; 
but in all conditions of life, I will seek thee as 
my Lord, my God, my Guide, my Portion, and 
my chief Benefactor. 

I come to thee, Lord, poor and needy, but 
thou canst give me unsearchable riches ; misera- 
ble, but thou canst give me a joy surpassing the 
ungodly pleasures of this world. I come to thee 
blind, but thou canst give me the eye of faith to 
discern things invisible ; naked, but thou canst 
clothe me with the righteousness of Christ. 

Notwithstanding my natural corruptions may 
often rebel, yet I will endeavor to order my 
whole life according to thy directions, and will 
not allow myself in any thing which thou hast 
forbidden. And subject as I am to failings, 
through the frailties of my nature, I do now 
implore that no unallowed miscarriages, con- 



COVENANT — PRAYER. 45 

trary to the settled purpose of my mind, may 
make this covenant void. 

To this, in the presence of God, I subscribe 
with my hand, 

George W. Blake. 

Boston, Oct. 19, 1829. 

The prayer following the covenant was in 
these words : — • 

Father in heaven, so far as I know my own 
motives in drawing up this covenant with thee, 
they are sincere. It is my desire to live near to 
thee, to seek wisdom and happiness in thee, and 
to grow in grace and in the knowledge of thee. 
In this world I look not for true riches. Al- 
ready am I convinced that there is no real sup- 
port in sublunary things, that the helj5 of man is 
vain, that the treasures of the earth are vanity. 
Therefore, God, I come to thee, not that I 
may, by giving myself up to thee, enjoy peace in 
this world, but to obtain eternal life. While 
wandering from place to place in this world, 
give me the consolations of thy Spirit, and 
though often surrounded by sin, temptation, and 
sorrow, enable me to come off conqueror, and 
more than conqueror, through him who loved 
me and died for me. Amen. 



46 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

On a blank leaf of the foregoing document 
were found the following entries, evidently made 
at different times : — 

Renewed this covenant — 
New York, Oct. 25, 1829. 
Savannah, Ga., April 23, 1830. 
" May 31,1830. 
Boston, Nov. 10, 1830. 
" June 24, 1831. 
" July 15, 1831. 
City of St. Domingo, Feb. 14, 1832. 
Aux Cayes, April 23, 1832. 
At Sea, Lat. 10° N., Lon. 20° W. Aug. 12. 

(From Boston to Buenos Ayres.) 
At Buenos Ayres, S. A., May 19, 1833, in 
prosperity. 

The above memoranda furnish proof of a 
faithfulness to his covenant most exemplary, 
and show how sincere and earnest was his reli- 
gion in every change of place, and amid all cir- 
cumstances. 



DEPARTURE FOR SAVANNAH. 47 



CHAPTER Y. 

Leaves Boston for Savannah. — Letters and Journal. — Picture of 
Mercantile Life. — Incidents in the Cotton Trade. — Goes on 
Business into the Interior of the State. — Interview with a 
Slave. — View of Theatrical Amusements. 

Mr. Blake left Boston for Savannah by way 
of New York. We find onr next date in his 
journal, while in the latter city. 

Oct. 25, 1829. 

Amidst the multiplicity of cares attendant 
upon a journey, and the taking up of a new 
abode and a new occupation, the last week has 
passed, I fear, with little improvement in spirit- 
ual things. It is now evening. I have been 
permitted to attend church twice, and hear two 
discourses ; one from " God is love," and the 
other, " Are they not all ministering spirits, sent 
forth," &c. I live on shipboard, and can not 
spend the Sabbath as I would. Lord, suffer it 
not to be in vain to me that another Sabbath has 
been added to my days. Renewed my covenant. 

Thus did he, as he was going forth to com- 
mence business on his own responsibility, without 



48 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

any human sympathy or encouragement, hold 
intimate communion with his Maker, and gather 
strength to live in the world as seeing him who 
is invisible. 

While on shipboard he wrote to his brother 
in Boston, — "I left many comforts when I left 
Boston, and lost many advantages. My situa- 
tion here is far from being pleasant. Think of 
all on board continually taking the name of 
God in vain — laughing and mocking at every 
thing serious. Even the young 's, forget- 
ting a kind father's injunctions, occasionally 
utter some big oath. I am compelled to hear 
most absurd stories about some of our pious peo- 
ple ; but while I hear, I pity in secret those who 
tell them, and give thanks that I am enabled to 
abstain from their sin. You can guess with 
what pleasure I sometimes escape, and visit 

Brother E 's family. Thank you for your 

kind advice. I shall follow it as far as practi- 
cable ; and while I trust in him who is invisible, 
I fear not." 

In his journal at Savannah he writes, — 

Nov. 22. 

It is now nearly a month since I have been 
permitted to enjoy retirement sufficient to record 
the continued goodness of God to me. But I 
hope that I have had, both on the ocean and on 



LETTER FROM SAVANNAH. 49 

the land, an abiding sense of his care and pro- 
tection. 

Nov. 30. 
What an irresistible vortex is the world ! 
Alas, how many do I see approaching it ! How 
many already within its influence ! How great 
the number annually taken in beneath its sur- 
face to perish forever ! Lord, save me, ere I 
become as those that go down into the pit. Oh 
grant that while in the world, I may live above 
the world. While I pursue my profession may 
I never forget that my help cometh from thee. 

A letter to his twin brother, to whom he wrote 
with unrestrained freedom, will give an idea of 
his situation in Savannah, and also a general 
view of a merchant's life. 

Savannah, Dec. 6, 1829. 

Dear Brother John : It is with much pleas- 
ure that I sit down to devote a few minutes to 
your service, after a long day of continued appli- 
cation to business. There is nothing to which I 
can compare a mercantile life, when business is 
brisk. Then nothing else is to be thought of. 
Every thing is hurried. One thing is ended in 
haste only to commence another in the same 
way. In fact, there is no slackening pace but 
only to swallow one's food. And I verily believe, 
that had Lot's wife been driven as hard from 
4 



50 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Sodom as we are here some days, she would 
never have fomid time to turn her head. This 
is not the worst of it. It is more than half done 
for nothing ! Strange as it may seem, not one 
half this bustle and confusion produces any 
profit. Merchants in these times are like saw- 
mills ; they must go as long as the gate is 
hoisted, whether there is any thing to saw or 
not. * * * 

My prospect for making money I should like 
to have more encouraging. I would not have 
you understand that my desires to grow rich 
are great, or that they make me unhappy in 
the least. I look on the future as uncertain — 
never depend upon a clear sky, and am never 
disappointed at the rising of a cloud. I look 
upon these as things of course — aim to he 
grateful for the present enjoyments, and trust to 
the Disposer of events for the future. 

While we are in the world we must, in some 
measure, conform ourselves to it, but in all 
instances, if we are disciples of Christ, live above 
it, and look upon all things here as nothing, 
when weighed in the scale with eternity. 

In the eyes of the world, no man is good for 
any thing as a merchant unless he loves money, 
and is ready to take advantage of every thing 
which leads to the making of it. What a pity 
that a man must be judged here by his possession 



ROUTINE OF DUTY. 51 

of and greediness for gold ! But thus it is ; and 
to grow rich, and be a Christian too, requires, in 
my opinion, much wisdom, forethought, and 
continued watchfubiess. 

Every man who would fear God and keep his 
commandments, and grow rich in earthly goods, 
ought to read the book of Proverbs through and 
through, and have it in his heart and at his 
tongue's end. I could give you a few texts now 
from that invaluable record, which would be 
very applicable to the subject ; but I take it for 
granted that you will have already anticipated 
them. Watching and praying are the best pre- 
servatives against temptation, and in the bustle 
of business we ought ever to bear in mind the 
great end of our existence, and aim to act as 
consistently as if we were in solitude or retire- 
ment. 

Ere I close, I will just give you a short sketch 
of my regular daily routine of business, so that 
you can judge, in some degree, how I am situ- 
ated. I rise in the morning before the sun, say 
half past six o'clock, walk through the city 
(for our house is the last but one or two in the 
suburbs) to the counting house, where I read 
newspapers ; go to the post office, read letters, 
and prepare for a day's work ; do some errands, 
and the like, until eight ; go home to breakfast ; 
back at nine. I stand at a desk until two, pay- 



52 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

ing and receiving money, (for I am cashier, and 
frequently pay or receive to the amount of 
$10,000 per diem ;) make bills, invoices, bills of 
lading, accounts current, accounts of sales ; draw 
drafts and bills of exchange, and negotiate them ; 
examine papers, and make calculations ; and, in 
fact, do all kinds of in-door business, together 
with all the transactions at three or four banks, 
occasionally going out to collect bills, &c. These 
occupy me until two o'clock, when I go through 
the city again to dinner ; return at three o'clock, 
and resume the same business till five o'clock, 
but am not so closely confined in the afternoon ; 
am sometimes able to be gone an hour or two, 
and do some business of my own ; at dusk 
return to my desk, examine my books, payments, 
and receipts, (carefully, for I am responsible for 
all that is lost,) balance my cash, &c., and get 
home to tea about seven in the evening. After 
tea, until nine, I am generally engaged in read- 
ing history, treatises on political economy, na- 
tional resources, value of money, increase of 
wealth, &c. From nine till ten I spend in stud- 
ying the French and Spanish languages. From 
ten to eleven I devote to reading the Scriptures 
and devotional purposes, this being the most 
retired hour in the day, my bed-fellow having by 
this time forgot himself in the arms of Morpheus ; 
and I am left alone to think over the actions of 



REMARKS ON PREACHING. 63 

the day — to commit my affairs to him who 
made me, and seek a blessing from the greatest 
of benefactors. 

Thus my days pass with little variation for 
the present ; soon they will all be numbered and 
finished. I desire ever humbly to pray that I 
may be so taught to number my days as to 
apply my heart unto true wisdom. With love 
to brothers and sisters, I am yours, most affec- 
tionately, 

Geo. W. Blake. 

In the journal, under date of Sab., Dec. 20, 
after speaking of the church services of the day, 
and the subject and doctrine of the discourse, we 
find the following just remarks : — 

" Although nothing could have been more 
true, or more worthy of attention, yet it ap- 
peared to me that to have its full impression, 
the speaker wanted a different manner. He 
used loud vociferations and violent gestures. 
Perhaps my views are erroneous, but I can not 
but feel that the terrors of the Lord should be 
set forth, not as if the speaker were the angry 
Jehovah himself, but with compassion, with 
meekness and deep feeling, with brotherly love 
and kindness. 

" I am aware that the infinitely gracious God 
chooses many different ways for convicting re- 



M THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

bellious men, and bringing them to the knowl- 
edge of himself; and after all, I cannot deny 
but that, in his wise providence, the various 
methods of preaching are all established to the 
end of promoting the greatest ultimate good." 

In a letter to his brother in Boston,. dated Jan. 
6, 1830, after mentioning some trying circum- 
stance in his own affairs, he adds, "It is all 
for the best. It serves to remind me of the fal- 
lacy of all terrestrial happiness — gives me an 
eye to look upon things unseen — to view death 
as the end of toil and trouble — to search for the 
hidden riches in the righteousness of Christ. 

" Though I have no retirement or leisure, I 
often feel that I do, in a measure, enjoy the light 
of God's countenance. I can often cast an eye 
over the sacred pages of the Scriptures, and see 
new beauties in the salvation by Jesus Christ ; 
wonder at the goodness of the Almighty in sav- 
ing so sinful a creature as myself, and find new 
causes for admiration and new themes of praise. 

" I hope you remember me in your prayers ; I 
tremble lest I should fall into some daring sin ; 
and frequently, for religion's sake, wish myself 
sequestered from the follies and vanities of man- 
kmd. I wish you would send me a bundle of 

tracts. has brought out a large quantity 

of Unitarian tracts, and I should like something 
of a coimteracting nature to distribute in this 
quarter. 



SOCIAL CUSTOMS IN SAVANNAH. 55 

" My best respects to Mr. . If he has 

given up his school, tell him I advise him to 
study theology ; and if the southern clime suits 
his constitution, to come out here." 

Journal. '^ Jan. 10. Lord, it belongeth to 
thee to unvail futurity. . I would in meekness 
and perfect reliance put my trust in thee. Pre- 
pare me for all thou art preparing for me. What- 
ever may be my temporal state, let not my heart 
forget thee." 

To his sister-in-law, in New York, he writes : 

Feb. 22. 

I often find in myself a disposition to repine at 
my condition ; but upon reflection I see that I 
have much to be grateful for, and must confess, 
that compared with thousands of the human race, 
I am one of the most favored, and I have not 
the least doubt but that I enjoy as much as if I 
was worth thousands. There is pleasant society 
here, but I mix with it but little. There is more 
dissipation than I like. Evening parties have 
their dances until twelve o'clock. Saturday 
evening seems a favorite time for these amuse- 
ments, and it is often a lamentable fact that the 
late hours encroach upon the Sabbath. Another 
odious custom, of having dining parties on Sun- 
day, is very annoying to me ; and the practice of 



56 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

spending two, three, and sometimes five and six 
hours at the dinner table. 

Mrs. P., in whose family I reside, is a good 
woman, and uses every method to please and 
make those happy about her. This adds much 
to my comfort. 

To his brother John : — 

Savannah, Feb. 20, 1830. 

Dear Brother J. : I am aware that you 
know not what it is to be hurried, being con- 
stantly engaged to the extent of your energies. 
Our profession goes by fits and starts, like an 
unsteady team, while yours flows like the stream 
which carries your machinery, ever onward in 
the same smooth current, — 

" Strong without rage, witliout o'erflowing full." 

With you there are no sudden excitements — 
no riding horses to death in carrying expresses 
to take advantage of other markets — no sheriff 
knocking at your door while at dinner, with a 
protest for a note neglected to be paid ere two 
o'clock — no trustee process, calling you out of 
bed at midnight to secure bad debts — no end- 
less lawsuits, to recover insurance on policies, or 
the amount of protested or non-protested bills of 
exchange — no depending creditors or scamper- 
ing blacklegs, to cheat you out of your dues. 



TRICKS IN TRADE. 57 

It is true that thus far troubles like these have 
not fallen upon me; but I mention them that 
you may know the beauties of our trade. 

Only a few days since, a report of a ship's 
being below, after the short passage of sixty- 
seven hours from New York, with later European 
advices, reached the city at five o'clock P. M. 
People were out buying cotton by candle-light, 
giving a cent a pound (|3 per bale) more than 
it could be sold for at two o'clock. All was 
bustle and confusion ; two or three thousand 
bales changed hands in the course of a few 
hours. The next day, at Augusta, eighty miles 
up the river, the same trick was played. Every 
body was buying cotton, but no one could tell 
why. The prices advanced to a cent and a cent 
and a half, although none knew what the news 
was. Well, the ship came up to town, and after 
all, it was found that she had no later dates than 
had been received ! 

This occasioned some long faces among the 
purchasers. So you see there is " a time to buy 
and a time to sell," as the case may be. To 
make money, it is necessary to watch the signs 
of the times, to keep an eye upon every move- 
ment, be well acquainted with the quantity of 
stocks in foreign markets, to calculate with 
precision the events of the future, and keep clear 
of rogues. 



58 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

While writing the former part of this letter, 
a gentleman has been reading Unitarian tracts 
to me. I find it of little avail to have any dis- 
pute with him. The best way is to convince 
such men by the purity of your life and charac- 
ter, your meekness and charity, that your prin- 
ciples are the doctrine of Christ ; showing them 
the beneficial efiects by your example, and never 
giving them cause to reproach you for irreligion 
or vice. How much vain contention might be 
saved by this method! How much strife and 
evil speaking might be done away by more hum- 
bly following the example of Christ ! . . . 

As you say, " time rolls away." But, my 
dear brother, let us, while we reflect on the 
shortness of its course on earth, have an eye on 
its infinite duration beyond this world, and 
though never permitted to meet again, let us 
rejoice in the hope of glory, and of never sepa- 
rating hereafter. 

Your most affectionate brother, 

G. W. B. 

His diary now gives some account of a journey 
into the interior of Georgia on business con- 
nected with the banks, during which he slept for 
many successive nights with a large bag of specie 
for his pillow. " Much of the route," he says, 
" lay through a barren country, with little to in- 



VIEWS OF THE THEATER. 59 

terest, except the people traveling with us, and 
those we met at the places of entertainment." 
He adds, " These places were generally con- 
structed of logs." 

Savannah, April 3. 

Dear Father : Your esteemed favor was duly 
received. I do not know that I have heard of 
any thing more pleasing, or that could afford me 
more gratification, than that you have a revival 
of religion in Westboro'. To every Christian 
the increase of God's people is an infinite source 
of joy ; but when we see converts flocking into 
the kingdom of Christ from our own native vil- 
lage — from among the companions of our youth, 
our school-fellows and playmates — it transcends 
every other cause of joy and thanksgiving. I 
can not but hope that it may long continue, and 
that its influences may be lasting upon the peo- 
ple of the village. 

The following extract from his journal will 
show his views in regard to theatrical amuse- 
ments : — 

April. 

I have this evening declined an invitation and 
ticket to a theatrical performance. By this 
course I reap the reward so often bestowed on 
those who would scrupulously and conscien- 
tiously adhere to the principles laid down in the 
gospel. 



60 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

The world says, " You feel yourself too sancti- 
fied and too good to go with us." They pity me, 
and think me deluded. They laugh at my con- 
scientiousness. But there is a dividing line, and 
how necessary that this line should be well de- 
fined and well understood by those on both 
sides ! Let the people of God refuse to mingle 
with the world in their ruinous pleasures. Let 
them dread the idea of crossing over to them, or 
countenancing their sinful assemblies. Who 
else will show where the difference lies between 
the lovers of the world and the lovers of God ? 
It should ever be a fixed principle, with believ- 
ers, to discountenance all which tends to evil, in 
whatever shape. It is my firm belief that thea- 
ters are nurseries of vice, and it is a solemn 
determination with me not to aid, assist, or 
patronize them. 

Although in doing this I displease man, yet 
I humbly trust I shall please God, who is the 
Judge, and him with whom I have to do here- 
after. thou who sustainest me, what is the 
praise of man to thine approbation ! To thee 
am I accountable. " Lead me to the Rock that 
is higher than I." 

In his journal, under date of April 11, he 
says, "A few days since, as I walked through 
the churchyard, on Sunday, I saw a poor negro 



A slave's attachment to his mistress. 61 

leaning over a large tomb-stone. No one was 
near him, and he appeared as if lamenting the 
departure of some dear friend. Having seen 
him before, I said to him, ' Why do you stand 
here, Jim ? ' ' Ah,' said he, in broken accents 
and faltering words, while the tear glistened in 
his eye, ' My poor mistress lies here.' He could 
say no more, but pointed me to the stone, and 
from the inscription I learned she had been dead 
four or five years. I said to him, ' Your mis- 
tress has been dead a long time ; why do you 
weep now ? ' ' Ah ! ' said he, ' she was so 
good to me ; she never troubled me ; ' and fresh 
tears stole from his eyes to bedew the stone 
which covered her remains. ' I come here,' 
said he, ' every Sabbath — the rain and the cold 
do not keep me away — I have not missed a 
Sabbath since her death. When I^am sick, it 
makes me well to come here.' ' Well, Jim,' 
said I, ' she is happy now ; don't weep for her. 
If you are good, you will soon be freed from this 
world and all its troubles, and meet her again 
above.' ' I know it,' said he ; ' she told me so 
before her death.' I passed On, leaving the 
poor fellow to his meditations — pitying him for 
the loss of a kind benefactor and friend. 

" If such affection, thought I, exists in the breast 
of a slave, what should my love and gratitude be 
to God for my freedom, and the many blessings 
I enjoy ! " 



62 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

In the journal of May 9, the writer seems to 
mourn over a decline in the ardor of his affec- 
tions. He says, "Oh, when shall I regard the 
world according to its worthlessness ! Although 
I have no Christian friend to reprove me, or with 
whom to hold sweet converse, I am not therefore 
blameless. Although I have no retired closet in 
which to lift my prayer, I find, that by rising 
early on the Sabbath I can leave the city, and by 
taking an unfrequented path, confined in the 
thicket, a place of seclusion. This day I went 
out as usual, and came upon the same spot 
where, two years since, I endeavored, on my 
knees, to seek the forgiveness of sin. Many for- 
mer impressions were revived, and I was filled 
with wonder and admiration at the goodness of 
God in bringing me from a state of ignorance 
and fixing my feet in a firm place ; as I trust, 
on the Rock Christ Jesus. 



* 01i,^how I love to leave the haunts of men, 
And seek retirement in the shady grove, 
Unseen by human eye, in lonely gien, 
In earnest prayer to look to him above ! 

' 'Tis there my soul, unshackled by the tie 
That binds it to the vanities of earth. 
Can leave the world, in raptures soar on high. 
And meet the Holy One who gave it birth.' " 

To his brother, in Boston, he writes : — ■' 



TEMPERANCE — WANT OP RELIGIOUS SOCIETY. 63 

April 7. 

I last eveiiiQg attended a temperance society 
meeting. To see a modern champagne party 
here, composed of many whose names are en- 
rolled among the members of the temperance 
society — to see them at the table after dinner, 
one could not but exclaim, " Temperance ! it is 
nothing but a name — a fiction ! Her name is 
spoken, but it is only to keep the sound, while 
the meaning is construed at the will of the 
speaker." 

I have heard nothing so good this winter as 
the news from Westboro'. It is like food to the 
starving soul to be permitted to see our village 
awakened. Nothing has made me feel so thank- 
ful. It is strengthening to one's faith to hear 
such tidings. I can only wish the continuance 
of this state of things, while I mingle my prayer 
with others, for the coming of the Redeemer's 
kingdom. 

I feel isolated as regards religious societ}^. 
Perhaps 'tis best. The want of an earthly friend 
often leads us to see the need of closer commu- 
nion with our Friend above. 

In a letter to the same brother, in May, in 
view of the state of his pecuniary affairs, he says, 
"I feel it necessary to economize. I suppose 
thinks me a fool that I have not been more 



64 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

gallant among the many ladies with whom I 
have become acquainted, and have not spent 
f 75 or 1100 for horse and coach hire, to ride 
and visit with them. Though I do not think 
some degree of pleasure of this kind at all crimi- 
nal, yet I must say that I can not, in conscience, 
spend money in trifling, which I should not deem 
myself able to give in charity. Should there not 
be in this a fixed principle ? " 

These, and similar letters to his brother, were 
principally on business, and were generally filled 
with communications in regard to their mutual 
commercial affairs, shipping, freights, &c. But 
while they show the man of business, there are 
incidental paragraphs which show also the mo- 
tives which actuated him — proving him to be 
also a conscientious and consistent Christian. 




DEATH OP AN INFANT SLAVE. 65 



CHAPTER YI. 

Journal. — Death of an Infant Slave. — Leaves Savannah for Bos- 
ton. — Holy Aspirations. — Letter to Youngest Brother. — Unites 
with Old South Chui-ch, Boston. — Struggles against Natural 
Temperament. — Great Depression of Spirits. — Letter to Brotlier 
and Sister in Xew York. — Rise and Progress of Revival in Bos- 
ton. — Letter to Brother John. — Anxiety about Earthly Pros- 
pects.— Letter to Sabbath School Scholar. — Formal Reasons for 
writing it. 

Savannah, June 13, 1830. 

Since I wrote last, a fellow-being in this house 
has been called to resign its breath. And shall 
I say it ? — this death seemed especially an occa- 
sion of thankfulness ; for this being was a slave, 
having hardly arrived at the first anniversary of 
its birth, and God has taken it, in signal good- 
ness, to himself above. It is now free — has 
escaped the miseries of bondage, and a life of 
suffering. The night after its decease, the moth- 
er, with several of the neighboring negroes, sat 
up watching. I was awaked at midnight by their 
songs, which they continued to sing imtil near 
morning. What can be more appropriate iii this 
people tlian joy at the death of their children, 
and weeping at their birth ! 

The season has far advanced, the weather 
quite warm, and probably on the next Sabbath I 
5 



66 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

shall have embarked for the Northern States. 
My residence here has been pleasant, and pros- 
perity has in a measure attended me ; but when 
I compare the state of my mind with what it was 
when I came, I feel that I have wandered from 
my Saviour. " Oh, send out thy light and thy 
truth ; let them lead me ; let them bring me to 
thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles." As I am 
soon to return to my native state, let my heart 
return, God, to thee. I commit myself to thy 
protection. Thou hast often been near me, and 
kept my mind in peace, when the winds and the 
waves roared. Help me now to put my trust in 
thee. 

Mr. Blake sailed from Savannah toward the 
last of June, and arrived in Boston on the 2d 
of July. Here he continued through this and 
the following year, engaged in business with his 
uncle. During this time, it is evident from his 
journal, that he was making progress in the di- 
vine life. The following lines, found among 
his private manuscripts, written after his return 
to Boston, speak the language of a soul longing 
for immortality : — 

<< Oh that I had wings like a dove" §c. 

Life's tempestuous billows rolling 

Display a troubled sea ; 
While clouds and storms obscure the sky, 
And man, alas ! is forced to sigh, 

This is no home for me. 



DESIRES FOR HEAVEN. 67 

Upward he looks, with eager eye, 

Toward mansions of the blest ; 
He sees by faith the calms above. 
Sighs for the pinions of a dove, 

To fly and be at rest. 

No joys on earth but mixed with pain ; 

All, all is poor at best ; 
Life's star affords a feeble ray ; 
Oh for the wings to speed my way 

To heaven, forever blest ! 

But help me. Lord, while fixed to earth, 

To be content to stay. 
And when thou shalt in mercy call, 
God of my life ! my Saviour ! all ! 

With joy I'll haste away. 
Sept., 1830. 

To his youngest brother, then at Meriden 
Academy, N. H., he writes : — 

Sept. 8, 1830. 

I am in receipt of your last, and rejoice that 
you are so pleasantly situated. . . . Most 
true, our duties to God are not to be forgotten, 
however much our time may be occupied with 
the things of the world. Let us continually, 
dear brother, bear in mind the shortness of life, 
the certainty of death, and the need of constant 
preparation for eternity. I have a hope that we 
shall, through sovereign grace, meet each other 
beyond this life. May God grant it. 

At the commencement of the year 1831, Mr. 



68 'THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

B., according to what seems to have been his 
custom, takes a general retrospect of the events 
of the year just closed, so far as they respected 
his spiritual and temporal interests. He seems 
to have been very watchful over his spirit ; and 
we find in the journal some solemn resolutions 
respecting his conduct on various points. On 
the last Sabbath in January he made a profes- 
sion of his faith in Christ, and united with the 
Old South Church, in Boston, then under the 
charge of the Rev. Dr. B. B. Wisner. 

Several pages of his journal, about this time, 
show a great struggle ; especially against what 
he denominates besetting sin, over which he 
seems to lament most sincerely. He says, " My 
natural irritability of temper has caused me 
more broken resolutions than would fill a volume. 
I do mourn, but almost despair of overcoming it. 
It often seems to me, that if I could retire from 
every human eye, I could weep for hours over 
my frailties." 

It is not intended to represent our young friend 
as faultless. He was of like passions with others. 
And to young persons, who are addicted to hab- 
its which they are convinced they ought to 
control and overcome, it will be encouraging to 
know that his struggle was not in vain. He was 
so enabled to overcome his impatience, that those 
who knew him in later life would not have sus- 



DEPRESSION OF SPIRITS. 69 

pected that lie had ever had occasion to write 
such "• bitter things," as we have seen, against 
himself. He was, at this time, also greatly tried 
in regard to his condition and prospects in life. 
He writes in his journal, — 

" Almost every day has brought the cross, but 
instead of taking it on my shoulders in a humble 
and Christ-like manner, I have repined and mur- 
mured. I am so situated that I have not an 
hour that I can call sacred to secret prayer." 
He closes this entry with this petition : -" Lord, 
in all my trials and difficulties here, do thou 
support and comfort me. One drop of consola- 
tion, from the boundless sea of thy love, will 
afford more real joy than oceans of this world's 
goods." 

The next letter to friends in New York is 
dated 

Boston, March 2, 1831. 

Dear Brother and Sister : Your good let- 
ter came duly to hand. I was glad to hear froni 
you. I have been of late rather low-spirited. 
Perhaps it is from the poverty of my prospects in 
business. At any rate, I see but little Avorth 
living for in this world. If this feclhig arose 
from a right spirit, and if, with strong faith and 
hope, I could heartily sigh for heaven, there 
would be some consolation for me. But not so ; 



70 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

there is still an unsubdued spirit in me. The 
best efforts of man, unblessed, are unavailing; 
and only the power of him who taught us to look 
from the earth can make us relinquish it for the 
love of heaven. If he has by his power raised 
us above the vanities of the world, he alone can 
sustain us above them, and prevent the weight 
of corruption from sinking us again. To console 
me, I doubt not you would remind me that the 
willingness of Christ seldom fails to meet the 
best en^Jeavors of men, and I must confess that 
there is a solace in this idea ; and the thought 
of what you would say to me has brought it to 
my mind. 

I hear good news from your city. It is re- 
freshing to learn that the work of the Lord is 
going on. If he did not permit us to see the 
people occasionally drawing from the wells of 
salvation, we should be apt to doubt the efficacy 
of the living waters ; and neglecting to dispense 
them to the needy, we should also leave off 
drinking ourselves. It is a time for gratitude 
and rejoicing with the Christian ; and we must 
be quickened to improve it to our spiritual advan- 
tage, fc 

The churches will rememl^er with graiitade 
the precious revivals of 1831. Such were the 
displays of almighty power, that Christians could 



REVIVALS. 71 

only look on with wonder and admiration ; and 
feeling the inadequacy of the means used, and 
their own insignificance, they were constrained 
to give God the glory. 

Some extracts from the journal, which show 
the progress of the work in Boston, will be 
given. 

Sabbath Evenixg, March 20, 

The last week has been distinguished in this 
city by an increase of religious interest. Prayer 
meetings have been held, and days of fasting 
and humiliation set apart by several of the evan- 
gelical churches ; and all who love our Lord 
Jesus in sincerity are looking for the coming of 
the Saviour, to bless us with the outpouring of his 
Spirit. We have news daily of revivals all around 
us ; at New York, New Haven, Hartford, Albany, 
and in Vermont, and in Maine. 

Under same date, he says, " Yesterday was 
observed as a day of humiliation and prayer by 
the Sabbath school teachers of this city." Of 
himself he says, " I did earnestly desire the 
salvation of my Sabbath school class. I spoke 
to them to-day, each in turn, of repentance for 
sin, and the necessity of it noiv ; but their appar- 
ent indifference distressed me. I have resolved 
to think much of them during the present week, 
and to pray much for them." 



72 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

March 27, lie writes, " I have this week heard 
of the conversion of three dear rehitives, in dif- 
ferent places. Is not the world to be pre- 
pared for the millennium by revivals of reli- 
gion ? And what great multitudes are still dead 
in trespasses and sins ! May this blessed work 
continue." 

Sunday, April 10. 

The work is going on. The Lord is reviving 
the church, and causing sinners to inquire the 
way to Zion. Hundreds are asking, What shall 
I do to be saved ? Christians are saying. Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do ? Never did I 
enjoy greater spiritual privileges. Never have I 
incurred such fearful responsibilities as at this 
time. Never have I had occasion to be more 
watchful, more prayerful, more sober-minded ; 
never to live a more holy life, in all manner of 
conversation. . . . The coming week will 
be one of peculiar interest. Eeligious exercises 
are to be continued for four successive days, by 
the evangelical churches in this city. 

April 17. 

Never have I witnessed a season of such bless- 
ed privileges as during the last v^eek. Many 
an anxious soul has found peace in believing. 
Many a careless sinner has been awakened ; and 



KEJOICING IN THE REVIVAL. 73 

hardened rebels have been softened to contrition. 
This is truly God's work, and who can doubt but 
he is in the midst of this city ! . . . When I 
could attend on the public services, I found it 
good to be there. It was reviving to see so many, 
who before, like Gallio, cared for none of these 
things, now listening intently to the words of 
truth. . In the countenances of many deep anx- 
iety was to be seen ; and when the invitation was 
given to inquirers to remain, many seemed gladly 
to keep their seats. 

May 1. 

What a privilege to live at this time ! Surely 
the prophet must have had reference to these 
days, when he exclaims, " Who are these that 
fly as clouds, and as doves to their windows ? " 
How do these scenes strengthen faith, and en- 
courage hope ! "Oh that men would praise the 
Lord for his goodness, and for his w^onderful 
works to the children of men ! " 

To his brother John he writes, — 

Boston, May 3, 1831. 

Dear Brother : Your kind letter contained 
much good news, and was gratefully received. 
The revival of religion continues here, and is 
working wonders. But there are so many of 
those who are still unconcerned, that there seems 
yet to be a great work to do ; Christians are not 



74 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

yet more than half awake. For myself, as a 
soldier of the cross, I sometimes think I am but 
a straggler after the camp ; and no doubt there 
are many more, who, like me, follow in the dis- 
tance. Nevertheless, our Captain is marching 
onward ; his kingdom is advancing. We must 
pray, and faint not. The Lord has remembered 
our family in mercy. Let us be grateful, but 
humble. 

Li his journal. May 26, he writes, " Never 
did I before so much realize the truth, that he 
who would serve God must endure a conflict. 
I see enough to convince me that there is much 
among Christians which I have not yet attained, 
and a little reflection shows me the necessity of 
perseverance, if I would overcome and gain the 
victory. But a sense of my inward defects and 
wrong propensities again almost discourages me. 
This life is indeed a continual warfare, and he 
who would be a soldier of the cross must put on 
the whole armor of God, and fight the good fight 
of faith." 

Li subsequent pages of the journal, particulars 
are given of kind and faithful religious conver- 
sations held by Mr. B. with several individuals. 
Eternity will disclose the results. For these in- 
dividuals he offered fervent prayer at his evening 



ANXIETIES — LETTER TO A S. S. PUPIL. 75 

devotions. To his Sabbath school scholars it is 
also evident he was most faithful in conversation 
and in prayer. 

About this time Mr. B.'s health seems not to 
have been perfect ; and he was becoming some- 
what anxious about his prospects in life. For 
some reason they seemed clouded, and he was 
tried in spirit. 

He writes, — 

July 16. 

I confess that I need this ; I have deserved 
this, and I hope and pray that it may do me 
good. my soul, remember that this world is 
not thy home — this is not thy rest. Thou art 
destined for heaven. Then be not discouraged 
because of perplexities and trials ; trust in God. 
He is thy portion for ever. 

The following letter, addressed to one of his 
Sabbath school scholars who was about to leave 
this country to make the tour of Europe, was 
found among his private manuscripts : — 

Boston, Oct. 23, 1831. 

My Dear Friend : I lament that I am under 
the necessity of leaving town this evening, or to- 
morrow morning early, as it will deprive me of 
the pleasure of seeing you again, and prevent me 



76 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

from fulfilling mj promise to be present at your 
embarkation. 

I therefore avail myself of this method of say- 
ing farewell to you, and of expressing the deep 
interest which I feel in all that concerns you, as 
well as to add a few words of advice ; which, 
knowing your willingness to give me your atten- 
tion heretofore, I trust you will not take amiss. 

I am not entirely inexperienced in the dangers 
which beset a young traveler. You are accom- 
panied by a friend, who, I doubt not, will be 
careful to advise you in respect to your moral 
habits. 

I know that you can not forget your beloved 
country, and the ideas of true liberty so dear to 
every American heart. I know you can not for- 
get your parents, your home, and the duties you 
owe to your kindred ; but I do feel that you may 
forget what is infinitely more important — your 
duty to God and to your own soul. To remind 
you of these is .the principal object of this letter. 
Will you not, my dear L., often think of these ? 
Often recall to mind the repeated warnings from 
our good pastor. Dr. Wisner, and those which 
you have, from time to time, heard in the Sab- 
bath school. Be assured, I shall often have you 
in mind, and while I pray that you may be pros- 
perous and happy in this life, I shall also pray 
that you may become interested in the great sal- 
vation by Jesus Christ. 



REMARKS ON DIARIES. 77 

Let me urge yoii to read your Bible, and 
think mncli of God. Do it often, with the most 
profound reverence for its divine Author. Labor 
not only to acquire a correct judgment of what 
is beautiful and sublime in nature, but also to 
get more enlarged views of the great first Cause, 
the Author and Supporter of all things. Let a 
sight of the poor, oppressed, and ignorant of our 
fellow-men, so common in the countries to which 
you are going, make you thankful for your birth 
in a land of freedom and plenty. 

You know that I have often asked you to 
become a Christian. You know the reason — 
that you may enjoy true happiness here and 
hereafter. And what need I say more, except 
adieu ! Go and prosper, and believe me sincere 
when I subscribe myself, your affectionate friend 
and Sabbath school teacher. 

The journal, which appears to have been dis- 
continued for a time, again commences, preceded 
by the following observations : — 

Sunday, Oct. 30. 

In consequence of reading an article in the 
Spirit of the Pilgrims, two or three months since, 
upon diaries or journals, I resolved to discontinue 
mine. But I have since often felt the need of it, 
and I do believe that one properly kept may do 
an individual much good. The objection urged 



78 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

against them by the writer of the article was, 
that they were, in fact, but the effusions of hy- 
pocrisy ; being written, confessedly, only for the 
eye of the writer, but with a secret intention to 
have them afterward exhibited to others ; that 
all the penitence and humility expressed was 
but a vail to cover pride, and gain the applause 
of men. 

Now, this may, in some instances, be true, and 
may possibly be true in my own case. I hope 
not, however. My motives are, for keeping a 
journal, — 

1. My own improvement in composition. 

2. To get better views of the subjects I under- 
take to study. 

3. That I may get the habit of thinking sys- 
tematically, and of communicating my thoughts 
with ease. Besides, my class in the Sabbath 
school are of an age to require forethought and 
study in an instructor. I may hope, in this way, 
to make some improvement that may turn to 
their account. 



VOYAGE TO WEST INDIES. 79 



CHAPTER YII. 

Decides to leave Boston for West Indies. — Letters to Brothers. — 
Voyage to St. Domingo. — Letter to Sister in K. — Scenes in the 
City. — Sunday in the City. — Lines on Fruits of Canaan. — Disa- 
greeable Detention. — Favorable Specimen of Papal Keligion. — 
Letter to Brother in Boston. — Unpleasant Voyage to Jacmel. — 
No Christian Friends. — Letter to Twin Brother. — Numerous 
Temptations. — Firm Trust in God. 

Mk. Blake, having decided in the beginning 
of 1832 to leave Boston in the prosecution of his 
business, took an affectionate leave of his Sab- 
bath school class, and made serious and earnest 
appeals to them in regard to their dut}^ He 
•says, in his journal, " They gave unusual atten- 
tion, and I can not but hope, through the bless- 
ing of God, that it may be the means of good to 
their souls." 

He also writes as follows to his brother at 
New Haven : — 

Boston, Jan. 12, 1832. 

Dear Brother: Amidst a thousand things 
to think of, you, at this time, stand out most 
promhiently in my mind. And it is with a feel- 
ing of sadness that I take this occasion to inform 
you that I am going away, and to bid you fare- 



80 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

well. I go in a few days to Newbiiiyport, from 
whence I take passage to the city of St. Domingo, 
in the West Indies. My destination on arriving 
there is uncertain. I may remain a year, and if 
every thing is favorable, I may establish myself 
for several years. However this may be, you 
shall hear from me after I arrive there. I shall 
wish to hear from you as often as practicable. I 
have been at home so long that it seems hard to 
leave the endearments of my native land. But 
I must go. I feel tliat I am accountable for the 
exercise of my one talent, and I can not be con- 
tent to stay and let it rust, by being only a clerk 
with a salary. 

I wish you to remember me to all our friends 
in New Haven. I shall think of them all in my 
absence, and often recount the pleasant hours I 
have spent with them. And as I wish them to 
pray for me, so I shall often pray for them. As 
for yourself, my dear brother, accept the assur- 
ances of every brotherly affection, and permit me 
to ask your kind intercessions at a throne of 
grace. Although the ocean often separates us 
in this world, yet praised be God, we both hope 
to meet in heaven at last. Let us keep this ever 
in view, and while it will cheer and comfort us 
to the end of our pilgrimage, it will enable us 
more to honor and glorify him who purchased 
. for us this blessed privilege with his blood. 



VIEWS OF DEATH. 81 

To his brother E., in Yale College, same 
date : — 

Dear E. : I refer you to my letter to brother 
J. in regard to my contemplated residence in 
the West Indies, and bid you good by. I have 
you often in my memory, and wish you every 
thing you can desire. 

I can not but refer to one of the inconsistencies 
of mankind with which I have been struck to- 
day. Many say to me, and expect to see me 
greatly alarmed. You will die if you go and stay 
there ; while they are told daily, by the passing 
hearse, that they too must die, while they neither 
give heed to it themselves, nor expect others to 
do it. So you see self is apt to be immortal, and 
every body else mortal. A man will say, you 
will die a hundred times, where he will say, / 
must die, only once. For myself, I consider the 
event predicted very possible. Time alone will 
tell. It only remains for me to be ready. Let 
us do what we have to do for Christ quickly ; 
and if we are his, we need never fear the ap- 
proach of death. 

Journal. At sea. Ion. m"" W., lat. 25° N. 

Sunday, Jan. 29, 1832. 

A change in my situation and prospects has 
placed me on shipboard, amidst the noise of 
6 



82 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

many waters, in a new climate, and under new 
responsibilities. Here, on this holy day, I would 
record the Lord's wonderful goodness to me. 
"We have been truly prosperous in our voyage. 
The winds and the waves have been almost con- 
stantly favorable. And while we have an abun- 
dance of provisions, we have fallen in with those 
who have been famishing; whose passage had 
been prolonged, and their provisions exhausted, 
and they had been obliged to live on raw hides 
for days together. Besides supplying them with 
provisions we gave them a sail, to set upon their 
naked masts, to enable them to reach their port. 
I have no fellow-Christian with whom to hold 
sweet converse on those things which concern 
our everlasting welfare ; but blessed be God, I 
find the Saviour even here, and can often com- 
mune with him -from off the mercy seat. To- 
day I sent by the steward some tracts to the 
sailors in the forecastle. I think much of the 
church, of the Sabbath school, and of the many 
interesting meetings of the week at home ; and 
as the time passes when I know them to be as- 
sembled, I endeavor to feel with them in the 
spirit, although far separated in the body. 

In speaking of the voyage, he says, " I have 
not seen a Bible on board, except my own ; nor 
have I seen any of the crew reading a religious 



LETTER FROM ST. DOMINGO. 83 

book, except the second officer, who had a ' Sea- 
man's Hymn Book,' presented by his mother; 
and the steward, a negro, who was earnestly 
engaged by candle-light in reading a tract which 
I gave him. Thus they are navigating the oc^aii 
of life without compass or chart ! " 

Having arrived at his destination, he writes 
to his sister, in K., as follows : — 

City of St. Domingo, Feb. 13, 1832. 

My Dear Sister : I was not able to write 
you before I left Boston, and therefore deem 
you entitled to the first services of my pen from 
abroad. I arrived on the 5th, after a pleasant 
passage of fifteen days. Preserved by the bless- 
ing of God, I still remain in good health. My 
destination from this place is Jacmel, or Jaque- 
mel, about two hundred miles west. 

I expect to leave here in the course of three 
or four days, in a Haytien vessel. So much for 
the things of this life. Of that which is to come 
I am enabled to say, I have it in prospect by 
faith, and only desire to be more prepared ; so 
that when this earthly tabernacle is dissolved, I 
may enter with joy into the house not made 
with hands, eternal in the heavens. 

This city, the first founded by Europeans in 
the new world, was built by Christopher Co- 
lumbus, soon after the discovery of the island. 



84 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Wliile I write yon I have the massive and crnm- 
bling rnins of his old castle in full view from my 
window. Tlie interior has fallen down, but the 
walls are still standing, and plainly show the 
marks of former grandeur. I have visited this, 
and have taken from the arch of the door which 
led from his sleeping room, a piece of the coral 
rock of which it is built, which I have saved for 
Mr. B. There are also in the city the ruins of 
several ancient churches, built by the Spaniards. 
They are of great extent, particularly that which 
once belonged to the Franciscan order of friars. 
This is now fast decaying, and is much dilapi- 
dated. You would be surprised at its extent. 
It covers two or three acres of ground. The 
principal apartment is more than one hundred 
feet by forty. Beside this there are four or 
five chapels, two thirds as large. Tliere are 
three large courts, eighty feet square, with foun- 
tains or wells in the center, surrounded by piaz- 
zas of two or three stories ; opening into which 
are cells, twelve to fifteen feet square. Of these 
cells, I should think there were from one hun- 
dred and fifty to one hundred and seventy-five. 
The roof of the large apartment has fallen 
through in two or three places. The galleries 
and organ loft also are down, while the beautiful 
pillars remain as solid as ever. The gilded carv- 
ing and stucco work, which decorated the cross, 



ANCIENT CHURCH. 85 

have been torn off by the negroes ; while of the 
altar, the holy basin, and the various images of 
Popery, there remain only sufficient to show 
where they formerly stood. The sepulchers 
have all been dug up, and the floor, or I may 
say the ground, (for there is no floor,) is strewed 
with gilded ornaments, broken up, and with the 
skulls and bones of its former tenants. 

In the niches, where once stood representa- 
tions of saints, or of the Virgin, are piles of 
human skulls in sad array. A naval officer, 
from one of our national vessels which was in 
port last week, being with me, thought it a good 
place to study craniology, and we spent some 
time in overhauling these sad relics of mortality, 
and speculated upon the probabilities as to the 
characters, disposition, and country of their for- 
mer occupants. For my part, I looked on all 
that surrounded me as emblematical of the 
downfall of Popery and superstition, and praised 
God for it. 

While in the church, walking past the door of 
a cell in one of the piazzas, which are now 
inhabited by a company of poor emigrant ne- 
groes, I inquired of an old woman in Spanish 
for something, and was surprised to hear her 
answer in English. I asked her where she came 
from ? She said from America — said she was 
sick and poor, and went frequently a whole day 



86 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

without eating. I looked at her with kindness, 
and she further said, eyeing me very closely, 
" This child look as if he love my God ; " and 
upon my saying I hoped I did, she shook my 
hand with a good deal of affection. She was a 
Methodist emigrant from Baltimore ; said she 
had property and children there, and came out 
to stay six months for her health ; and in con- 
sequence of a law prohibiting the blacks from 
leaving Hayti without a passport, (which she 
was unable to pay for,) she had remained in the 
church seven years. The tears ran down her 
old cheeks as she said, if it was God's will, she 
could spend the few remaining days she had to 
live thus separated from her home. She spoke 
well upon religion, and actually seemed to live 
upon it. She laughed in the midst of her tears, 
as she spoke of the goodness of God. 

On the Sunday evening following, a pious 
American shipmaster, who resides here, asked 
me to go to church, and took me to this same 
Franciscan ruin. The door at one end was 
open ; and as I walked in, I saw that a small 
part of that end of the large apartment had 
been separated from the rest by a partition of 
rough boards. It was now partially lighted by 
four or five tallow candles. The ground was 
scraped clean, and there were five or six rough 
seats fixed on stakes around an old desk. The 



PRAYER MEETING. 87 

moon shone in through the broken roof, and 
seemed to give more light than the candles. 
There were about ten persons in all, who com- 
pose the congregation. One of the negroes 
preached, extempore ; and after a good deal of 
repetition closed off, and the service was turned 
into a prayer meeting. And I can assure you, 
that even amid the shrill notes of the lizards, 
which live beneath the vines that overrun the 
building, and the barbarous music of a negro 
ball in the neighborhood, it made my heart leap 
to hear the voice of prayer, and the Lord's song 
in a strange land. The negroes had good voices, 
and I can never forget the impression made by 
the two lines which they sung last : — 

«' His truth shall sound from shore to shore, 
Till suns shall rise and set no more." 

As the sound died away among the old arches of 
superstition and ignorance, the echo seemed to 
say it over and over again. 

I learned after the meeting, that this was a 
small Methodist society composed of emigrants 
from the United States ; and that I had been to 
the only Protestant church in all the Spanish 
part of the Island. The natives are all Cath- 
olics, or nothing at all. Sunday is a holiday. 
The shops are open, and balls and entertain- 
ments are given. Justice is here easily bought. 



88 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

The rich are degraded by the worst of vices, and 
the poor are wretched in the extreme. 

The antiquity of the city alone makes it in- 
teresting. The walls, gates, forts, castles, and 
towers are all ancient and worth seeing. It is 
to be regretted that the antipathy of the native 
negroes to the Spaniards has led them to demol- 
ish many things which were worth preserving. 
Only a year since they took from the church 
several loads of human bones, (Spanish,) of 
which they made a bonfire. They destroyed 
also many beautiful monuments and paintings. 
You may suppose that these Catholics care little 
about their religion, when they violate their 
sanctuaries in this manner; and it is indeed 
true. I do believe that if the truth was 
preached here faithfully in their own tongue, it 
would do immense good to thousands. How I 
lament that I do not know more of the Spanish 
and French languages, although I am daily en- 
deavoring to improve in them ! I can get along 
in business, but can not converse sufficiently to 
teach one of these poor people the knowledge of 
a Saviour. 

I am surrounded on all sides by temptations 
of which you can have no conception. Do pray 
that I may not fall into them. I think often of 
my brothers and sisters, and frequently of the 
affliction you were called to endure in the death 



SABBATH IN ST. DOMINGO. 89 

of your dear E. I assure you I do feel a 
brother's sympathy, and ever shall. Will you 
not write me often ? I am sure you would, if 
you could conceive the joy that letters from my 
friends give me when so far separated from them. 
I am becoming accustomed to the manner of liv- 
ing here. Rise at six, take one cup of coffee at 
six and one half; breakfast at eleven, dine at 
five, and go to bed at ten. I am, most sincerely, 
your affectionate brother. 

In his journal he writes, — 

Sunday, St. Domingo, Feb. 19. 

I have been permitted this morning to assem- 
ble with a few sable Africans in a social prayer 
meeting, and by request, to lift up my voice with 
theirs in supplication and thanksgiving. There 
were but five present, but these were sufficient 
to claim the promise, " Where two or three," 
&c. 

It is mournful to see so small a number sur- 
rounded by so many enemies of the cross, strug- 
gling against so many temptations and trials as 
they have to encounter in this dark land of su- 
perstition. But the words of Jesus, " I will 
never leave thee, nor forsake thee," should dis- 
pel our fears. 

Every Sabbath here is a military day, and 
all the citizens, sixteen years old and upward. 



90 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

are reviewed in regiments or companies. These 
soldiers repair to the field before day for this 
review. How few Christian soldiers would thus 
rise early, that they might be prepared to meet 
and resist the enemies of their souls ! 

Feb. 26. 

This Sabbath I have partly spent in retire- 
ment, and partly with a fellow-Christian and 
countryman, whom a kind Providence has 
thrown in my way. I find the beauty of the 
proverb exemplified in his company, " As iron 
sharpeneth iron, so the countenance of a man 
his friend." 

Mr. Blake deplores the ignorance and super- 
stition prevailing about him, and contrasts them 
with the state of things in his own country. He 
trusts, notwithstanding, that there may be some 
Christians there, among whom was, perhaps, his 
landlady. She was scrupulously exact in her 
devotions, "though Santa Marie got a large 
portion of her worship ; " and " as her departed 
friends might be in purgatory," every Friday 
night, when the Virgin is supposed especially to 
intercede, she is sure to leave a white candle 
burning in a snug corner of her house. He 
adds, "Her temper and conduct are, in many 
respects, a model for any one." The object of 
Mr. Blake's visit to this island, as on former 



JACMEL. 91 

voyages of this kind, was to make purchases of 
the produce of the country and ship them to 
Boston. The expedition was planned between 
himself and a merchant in that city, and they 
were equally concerned in the enterprise. 

After being detained longer than he intended 
in St. Domingo, he sailed for Jacmel ; and we 
find the following notice of the voyage in his 
journal : — 

Jacmel, Hayti, Sunday, March 11, 1832. 

I sailed from St. Domingo on this day, a week 
since ; arrived here late on Friday evening, and 
landed Saturday morning. I feel that I never 
had more cause for gratitude than at the present 
moment. 

Exposed on the ocean six days and six nights 
in a miserable, leaky, and rotten vessel, to the 
mercy of an ignorant captain who ran ashore 
once, and whose perverseness and unfriendliness 
would not permit him to bestow one comfort, or 
show a symptom of human kindness, such as is 
often found in the vilest of men ; sleeping, or 
rather watching through the nights in the open 
air, the rain often descending in torrents, the 
sea breaking over me and wetting me through, 
while at day exposed to the rays of a tropical 
sun ; and yet, blessed be God, I have reached 
my port in safety and in health. 

I find here many Protestant foreigners, but as 



92 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

yet apparently no Christians. All that I have 
met are blasphemers, and are continually curs- 
ing and swearing in conversation. These are 
the nearest earthly associates I can have here. 
When I think with what my path is surrounded, 
and the number of the enemy without, together 
with my own evil heart and propensities, I am 
ready to sink down, as did Peter, and cry, 
" Lord, save me, or I perish ! But, Lord, forgive 
my weakness of faith. Thy strength is sufficient 
for me ! Enable me to tread the thorny road, 
fearless of man — fearful only of thee. my 
Saviour, I do promise to be only thine, and wilt 
thou condescend to be my refuge at all times ? " 

Jacmel, Marcli 26. 

The Lord hath prospered me, and spared me 
to see another of his holy Sabbaths. I am in- 
vited to dine, to ride, to walk, to purchase, and 
to sell, on the Sabbath ; and when I state that I 
do not dine out, ride or walk abroad, or do any 
business on Sunday, they look at me with aston- 
ishment. They have always been accustomed to 
consider religion as a local thing ; and to think 
there is a great difference between a Christian 
at home, and a Christian abroad. The Lord has 
given me grace thus far to declare fearlessly 
my relation to him; and though I be openly 
scorned, I can secretly rejoice that I am counted 
worthy to suffer for Christ. 



pilgrim's progress. 93 

I sometimes hear in tlieir conversation the 
taunting words, Methodists, Presbyterians, cou- 
pled with curses. I rejoice, and am grateful to 
God, that I am one of the class whom they affect 
to despise. How much should they be pitied ! 
The very men using this language were born 
and educated in the doctrines they revile ! 

Jacmel, April 8. 

I have this day been reading Bunyan's Pil- 
grim's Progress, and have followed ■Christian 
and his associates. Hopeful and Faithful, from 
the City of Destruction, until they had passed 
the gate of the Celestial City. How often do I 
find myself in the difficulties and dangers which 
they met with ; and how often am I assaulted 
with the enemies they encountered ! In this 
place I find many Hills of Difficulty, roaring 
lions, Apollyons, and many a Worldly Wiseman ; 
and I am often tempted by Mr. By-Ends and Mr. 
Legality. 

Lord, sustain me through this conflict. 
Keep my erring feet from straying into forbidden 
paths. I bless thee, that I can trust in thee ; 
and that while thousands around me are has- 
tening to destruction, thou hast shown me my 
danger, and hast put into my hands the keys of 
eternal life. Oh, incomprehensible grace ! Oh, 
love divine ! May I adore, obey, and serve thee, 
wliile I ascribe all to my blessed Saviour. 



m 



94 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

<' Lord, unto thee I lift my cry, 
And make my daily prayer ; 
"While thickening darts around me fly, 
Oh, let me ne'er despair. 

" Let the uplifting of my hands 
(My heart arising too) 
Be as the daily sacrifice. 
And every evening new. 

" A watch, O Lord, before my lips, 
I pray thee, ever place ; 
To keep the door, that I may speak 
Of naught against thy grace." 

To his twin brother : — 

Jacmel, Hayti, April 9. 

Dear Brother John : The climate here is 
delightful. The soil is so fine as to produce 
from one day's labor what would support a man 
six days ; and man here seems proportionally 
ungrateful and indolent. The government is 
nominally republican, but in reality despotic and 
tyrannical. The trade is in the hands of those 
who can pay the greatest bribes. I have now 
been here four weeks, and think of leaving in a 
few days for Aux Cayes ; from thence to visit 
some other ports, and return here or to the Unit- 
ed States. So far, by God's blessing, I have 
enjoyed excellent health, and have been pros- 
pered as well as I could expect. I find my 
privations very great. You would not need to 



RELIGION AND MORALS IN JACMEL. 95 

be here more than two weeks, to make you 
doubly value the privileges of New England. 
Here is no religion. All is a mockery. No 
concern for perishing souls, until the persons 
who possessed them have died ; and then, pray- 
ers are said for them in good earnest, and only 
then ; and these last as long as the surviving 
relations can afford to pay for them. The priest 
pleads hardest, and loudest, and longest, for 
those who pay him the most money, and make 
him the most presents. Just place yourself 
among such a set, with a few Americans and 
Europeans to swear in. English, the priest to 
pray in Latin, the people repeating their Ave 
Maria's in French Creole, and you stand in my 
shoes. 

My path is a rugged one. I find no fellow- 
Christian here, no lovers of the Lord Jesus 
Christ ; none to counsel and advise ; none to 
comfort and help me in my spiritual warfare. 
I am looked upon as a prodigy, because I will 
not play at billiards on Sunday, as most Ameri- 
cans are accustomed to do here. And I can as- 
sure you that it requires much grace to light 
one through this heathenish darkness. Faith in 
Christ alone can sustain me. This I pray for, 
and I liope my Saviour will vouchsafe to give it. 
Be grateful for your privileges, and pray for 
your brother, who is deprived of them. 



96 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

I hope I may be able to do sometliing for the 
cause of Christ in this desolate place, and obey 
the command to let my light shine before men. 
But I feel that, at present, amid the blackness 
of darkness that surrounds me, it must be but a 
dim taper. 

In his journal he •writes : — 

Aux Gates, April 22. 

During the last week I have been witness to 
all the superstitious ceremonies of the Catholic 
church, which usually take place during the 
holidays of Good Friday. I have great cause 
for thanksgiving that I can look above all these 
forms, to find my happiness, and that I can see 
that they are useless and extravagant. My busi- 
ness has absorbed many of my thoughts this 
day. Oh, what temptations are continually be- 
setting me ! what trifles will take my attention ! 
Lord, suffer me not to fall. Hold thou me uj, 
and I shall be safe. 

Port au Prince, Hayti, Sabbath, May 6. 

Amidst a thousand difficulties and dangers I 
safely arrived at this place the last week ; and I 
have additional reason for blessing the Lord, who 
daily loadeth me with benefits. 

I had hoped to find some fellow-Christian 
here, but as yet I have not succeeded ; so that 



SPIRITUAL PRIVATIONS. 97 

instead of looking for the subjects^ I have more 
earnestly to seek for the King, who is ever ready 
to give audience, and whose presence fully com- 
pensates for the absence of his people. I have 
hitherto found it as difficult to keep the Lord's 
day in a strange land, as did the Israelites to 
sing the Lord's song by the rivers of Babylon. 
Although I can not forget thee, Jerusalem, 
and although I can say, I prefer thee above my 
chief joy, yet I am so far separated from all who 
love thy courts, that I am continually inclined 
to be led away by the hand of strange children. 

Lord, though I can not serve thee as I would, 
and keep thy Sabbaths in the way of thine ap- 
pointment, yet I do love and value them. The 
church with which I am connected is this day 
celebrating the Lord's supper. 

Oh that my soul could have a corresponding 
feeling with what tlieirs should be who com- 
memorate the dying love of Jesus ! 
7 



98 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER YIII. 

Port au Prince. — A Case of Sickness. — Returns to Boston, — Letter 
to youngest Brother, in Yale College. — Sails for Buenos Ayres. — 
Journal at Sea. — Severe Gales. — Letter to Father. — Picture of 
Romanism. — Letter to Brother and Sister. — Struggles against 
Temptations. — Letter to Brother in Yale College. — Disturbed 
State of the City. — Solitariness. 

In the next pages of his journal we find a 
reminiscence of a young man whom he met on 
the south side of this island. 

" He was," he writes, " a yoimg gentleman of 
respectability and good education. He came to 
the island in pursuit of health, suffering under a 
disease which will, no doubt, end his life in less 
than a twelvemonth. 

" He told me that he was a free-thinker ; that 
his father and mother were both Christians ; that 
they had used every means in their power to lead 
him to think and feel as they did ; that he had 
himself tried to be a Christian, but all without 
efiect; that he had become skeptical, and 
doubted as to any existence hereafter. He 
asked my views and feelings. I told him he 
was on dangerous ground ; that religion would 
make him happy here, and could not harm him 



CONVERSATION WITH A SKEPTIC. 99 

if there should be no existence after death. I 
advised him to be sure. ' Do you believe in any 
God ? ' said I. ' Yes ; the God of Nature,' said 
he. ' Do you believe that he cares any thing 
about men, and that prayer is of any use ? ' 
' Yes, I believe he loves men, because he has 
given them so much to enjoy ; and I believe he 
hears their prayers, because he loves them.' 
' Then,' said I, ' if you are in doubt, go to him 
in prayer. Tell him you wish to know what to 
believe ; that if the Bible is true, you desire to 
be guided into all truth ; that if Christ is the 
Saviour, you wish to be enlightened in regard to 
him. Pray with all earnestness. Tell him you 
deem it a question of life and death to know 
your duty, and that you are determined to do it. 
Tell him he knows all things — that you are 
human, erring, short-sighted, and compared with 
him, know nothing. If,' said I, ' you do this in 
earnest, you will know what is right, and can 
not mistake, for God himself will direct you. 
Men may tell you different stories to perplex 
you, and they may err, like yourself; go to 
God: 

" I left him, and prayed for him ; and often 
after would commend him to God. I saw him 
again only to say farewell. I had a yearning 
over his soul which he knew not of. How would 
I have rejoiced to know that he was a Christian ! 



100 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

His parents — how would they welcome him 
home, although so soon to be consigned to the 
grave, if they knew he was prepared for a happy 
end ! " 

Port au Prince, Sunday, May, 1832. 

During the last week several conflicting events 
have tried me much. The results have not yet 
been made known to me ; but I bless God that 
he will withhold no good thing from them that 
walk uprightly, and that all things shall work 
together for good to them that love God. 
Lord, let me not murmur or repine when I meet 
with disappointments. 

Has the vessel that was to bear me home left 
me behind ? It may be that my life was to be 
saved thereby. Have my friends forgotten me ? 
It is, perhaps, to save me from my enemies. 
Therefore let me be content ; careful always to 
do my duty, pursuing always that course, prayer- 
fully, which, with due reflection, appears for the 
best, and leave events to him who alone controls 
them, and who in infinite wisdom orders every 
providence aright. 

At Sea, Lon. 75° W., Lat. 32° N. 
Sunday, June 10, 1832. 

This is the second Sabbath since I left the 
land. After long journeying and many perils I 
am now on my way to the land of my nativity. 



VOYAGE HOMEWARD. 101 

May this remind me of the time when my earthly 
pilgrimage will be brought to a close, and of my 
approach toward the beautiful city in the heavens 
— the new Jerusalem — where the toils of life 
are felt no more ; where all my joys will be per- 
fected in my nearness to Christ, and my fellow- 
ship with the saints. Do I long for favorable 
winds to swell our sails, that we may arrive 
speedily at our port? So may I long for the 
celestial breezes — the breath of heaven — to waft 
my soul nearer the blessed haven of peace ! I 
have been thinking much of home, and the 
church, and looking back on all the way in 
which the Lord has led me ; and I feel that he 
is with me, even here, this day. 

Sunday, Boston, July 2. 

I landed at Philadelphia two weeks since this 
day, at noon, just in time to reach Dr. Skinner's 
church in Mulberry Street, and attend the after- 
noon service. I could hardly refrain from tears, 
when again permitted to unite in prayers and 
praises with the people of God. The Saviour 
was indeed very precious ; and the sermon, from 
^' He went away sorrowful, for he had great pos- 
sessions," was well adapted to my circumstances 
and frame of mind. The preacher described 
minutely the motives which should influence 
those who go abroad in search of wealth. To- 



102 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

day I have been permitted to sit with my own 
people at the table of the Lord. May the occa- 
sion be blessed to my soul ! 

To his youngest brother, in Yale College : — 

Boston, June 27, 1832. 

Dear Brother Edward : I am glad to hear 
of the revival among you again, and of the dis- 
tinguished subjects of it which you mention. 
You ask my opinion on two important ques- 
tions. The first, " Are Christians in America 
self-denying, constant, and zealous enough to 
insure the spread of the gospel ? " I think all 
will answer in the negative. The second ques- 
tion, " Can a man forsake all and follow Christ, 
and manifest at the same time as much indiffer- 
ence in his cause as three-fourths of the pro- 
fessors of religion in our country do ? " is' more 
difficult to answer. If we say " no," we shut 
three-fourths of the American Christians out of 
heaven. If we say " yes," we justify many in 
a worldly and sensual life. We might inquire 
what it is for ourselves to forsake all and follow 
Christ, and perhaps be better profited, since no 
man is permitted to judge his neighbor in spirit- 
ual affairs. I consider it to be the denying our- 
selves those pleasures and gratifications which 
war against the soul ; turning our backs upon 
every thing, however lovely, that would obstruct 



SELF-DENIAL IN CHRISTIANS. 103 

our pilgrimage toward Zion. Bunyan's hero, 
flying, and stopping his ears, is a good illustra- 
tion. We have natural desires and spiritual 
desires. Whichever predominates, decides the 
character. These two kinds of desires clash ; 
and may, in many of the really pious, for want 
of self-examination and watchfulness, be so 
nearly balanced in their effects as to render it 
doubtful which is the most cherished. A man 
may not know himself, and surely others can not 
know for him. Such characters are to be pitied. 
They are a kind of camp-loiterers. They may 
fight if they are called out, and get engaged ; or 
they may be emissaries of the wicked one. Our 
Saviour had many followers when on earth. 
Some attended close to his person ; others fol- 
lowed at a distance. There were many who 
were engaged in the various trades and occupa- 
tions of life ; and we read of only a few chosen 
ones who were called to forsake them. Many 
pursued them apparently with his approbation ; 
and the apostle testifies that it is good to be 
" diligent in business." 

It is my desire to love this world so little that 
when I am called to leave it, my soul may only 
have to disentangle itself from the body, and not 
be obliged to break those iron bands which too 
often bind the Christian to this earth. I would 
enjoy every pleasure here but in part. The cup 



104 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN BIERCHANT. 

of happiness here should be served up with that 
bitter herb, uncertainty. Security should only 
exist in a feeling of insecurity." 

In the summer of 1832, Mr. Blake, in pur- 
suance of his commercial plans, left Boston for 
Buenos Ayres, in South America. He started 
at short notice, first taking an affectionate leave 
of dear friends. We give an extract from his 
journal on the voyage : — 

At Sea, Sunday, July 29. 

After eighteen hours' notice of the destina- 
tion of this vessel, I found myself, at 12 o'clock, 
on the 18th, sailing rapidly away from friends 
and country, bound to a distant port. This is 
now the Lord's day, and the eleventh of our 
voyage. So far we have made progress almost 
unprecedented, and beyond our utmost expecta- 
tions. The gulf and its turbulent waters have 
been passed, and we are now sailing with every 
thing propitious in the smooth waters of a more 
genial clime. The v/eather is delightful, and all 
that surrounds us seems calculated to call forth 
the most lively gratitude to him " whose path is 
in the great waters." I can not but hope that I 
may yet find some one, or more, in our company, 
who has tasted and seen that the Lord is gra- 
cious. 



VOYAGE TO BUENOS AYRES 105 

The captain expressed mncli surprise that 1, 
who had been about the world so much, should 
be a Christian, and believe the orthodox faith ; 
says he can hardly credit it. I hope, neverthe- 
less, to bear witness to the truth, and to convince 
him by my life and conversation on board the 
ship, that a man with a knowledge of the world 
may yet be among the meek and humble follow- 
ers of Jesus. I told him how much every oath 
and idle mention of God's name grieved me, 
although I had not said this at the time he ut- 
tered them. He said, his wife did not approve 
of it, and ' for her sake,' he condescended to ask 
me to check him, in future. 

At Sea, Lat. 6« south, Aug. 26. 

I have been comparing the flying fish, myri- 
ads of which are continually hovering about us, 
to the Christian. Their innocence and beauty, 
their peculiar distinction from all other fishes, 
which are their enemies, and the means which a 
wise Creator has provided for their escape from 
danger, the power to raise themselves above the 
world of waters, and then to let themselves down 
again into its depths, are very remarkable. 

»• Such the pure soul that scorns to rest 
Upon the world's ignoble breast, 
But takes the plume that God has given, 
And rises into light and heaven." 



106 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

*' But when I see that wing so bright, 
Grow languid by a moment's flight, 
Attempt the paths of air in vain, 
And sink into the waves again," — 

I can not help following the poet through, 
uttering his prayer : — 

*' O virtue, when thy clime I seek, 
Let not my spirit's flight be weak ; 
Let me noi, like this feeble thing, 
With brine still dripping from its Aving, 
Just sparkle in the solar glow, 
And plunge again to depths below : 

'* But when I leave the grosser throng, 
With whom my soul has dwelt so long, 
Let me, in that aspiring day. 
Cast every lingering stain away. 
And, panting for thy purer air. 
Fly up at once and fijc me there ! " * 

Our young friend found no one on the ship 
like-minded with himself; on the contrary, 
" some who even hated with a perfect hatred the 
religion of Christ." But though he had no hu- 
man fellowship, it is evident that his faith was 
strong in God, .and that he maintained constant 
communion with him. In an entry in his journal 
of September 2, he says, " I have renewed my 
covenant with the Lord, and feel strengthened 
by it." Again : " I feel even here, far at sea, 

. * T. Moore. 



SEVERE GALES. 107 

that the hand of the Lord leads me, and his 
right hand upholds me." On another page he 
says, " I shall soon be a stranger in a strange 
land. Lord, may I ever feel myself such while 
in the flesh, separated from heaven and thee." 

Sunday, Sept. 16. Off the River La Plata. 

The last ten days have been clouded with dis- 
appointment. We have been driven from our 
course, and have had two of the most severe 
gales, or tempests, I have ever experienced at 
sea. The first continued forty-eight hours, the 
last, thirty-six. In the first,, we were in great 
danger of foundering from the leaking of the 
vessel. The pumps became choked, and it re- 
quired great exertion to free her. The waves 
rose in awful sublimity, and each threatened 
to overwhelm us; carrying away our bulwarks 
and deck-houses, opening our seams, and letting 
the water through upon us in streams. Had the 
gale continued a few hours longer we must all 
have been in eternity. The last gale was nearly 
as severe, parting our stays, and I was momen- 
tarily expecting to hear the crash of falling 
masts. If we had lost these, we must have been 
left to starve upon the broad ocean. Happily 
they were again secured. The tempest passed, 
and we still live to see the light of this holy day, 
one of the most pleasant which I ever witnessed. 



108 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Notwithstanding the wonderful proofs of God's 
power which we have witnessed, our captain and 
crew seem wholly unmindful of his existence, 
though they still continue to blaspheme his name. 
They boast of the strength of the vessel, and their 
skill in directing it, to which they attribute our 
deliverance. But I must ascribe our wonderful 
escape to him who ruleth the raging of the sea. 

Lord, to thee be all the 'glory. I thank thee 
that I was enabled through the greatest danger 
to maintain a cheerful and resigned temper ; and 

1 pray that thou wouldst enable me to fulfill the 
vows I made at that season. 

To his father : — 

Buenos Ayres, Sept. 29. 

My Dear Father: Three months since I 
little thought of writing to you from this place ; 
and now it seems hardly true that I am six 
thousand miles from home. When I think of 
the tempests and billows, and remember that 
the turbulent ocean separates me from the land 
of my fathers, my heart almost sickens ; while 
the uncertainty of the future prevents me from 
looking forward with any assurance to the happy 
period of again visiting it. You may, perhaps, 
think that as I become familiar with such cir- 
cumstances, I should bear these separations with 
less and less feeling. But it is not so. Home, 



LOVE OF HOME — BUENOS AYRES. 109 

when I first left it, was dear ; next it was pre- 
cious ; then it was most desirable of all places ; 
and now I am ready to say in good earnest, 
' There is no .place like home ; ' and every separa- 
tion, I think, should add another 'sweet' to 
the song. 

I wrote a few lines to you as I was sailing out 
of Boston harbor, which I hope you have re- 
ceived. Exactly nine weeks afterward, I landed 
at this place, on the 19th inst. The celebrated 
river on which this city stands, is said to be one 
of the largest in the world. But I can only tell 
you that I am now two hundred miles from its 
mouth, and am not able to see the opposite shore 
— the width here being thirty miles. This will 
give you some idea of its size. My business 
occupies me almost constantly, permitting me to 
snatch only time to perform my religious duties, 
and occasionally give an hour or two to my 
friends. I desire to tender my warmest love to 
you and mother,* and to be remembered to all 
in W. who remember me. I have many fears 
in regard to the cholera at home. I hope all 
our friends will be spared, but pray that all may 
be prepared for what our heavenly Father has 
prepared for them. I know that all things will 
go well with them that fear God. But, alas, for 
others a fearful looking for of judgment must be, 

* His father had again married. 



110 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

at such a time, placed before them, and be 
brought to bear upon their minds with an over- 
whelming effect. May you and yours escape. 
I endeavor to accustom myself to think of death 
as always near, a waiting servant, myself a 
debtor ; and I never write a letter to send any 
distance but I am reminded of the frailty of 
man. Thus I think to myself, I do not know 
that I shall live to receive a reply. I do not 
know, alas, that the person lives to whom I 
write, and who can tell who shall read the lines 
I am now penning ? Such are the uncertainties 
of our existence here ; and they are to our lives 
a bitter, but, nevertheless, a wholesome draught ; 
and when taken as the Lord prepares it, may 
form one of those blessed ingredients which 
make up the cup of salvation. 

In his journal he writes : — 

Buenos Ayres, Sunday, Sept. 30, 1832. 

This is now the second Lord's day I have 
enjoyed here. How good and how blessed it is 
to find again a few of the Lord's friends ! How 
delightful the privilege of uniting with them in 
praises, weak and feeble though they are ! How 
kind the Saviour, to be as ready to bless even 
two or three, as a multitude ! so that none need 
despair of obtaining a hearing. 

I find the religion of this people buried in 



RELIGION AT BUENOS AYRES. Ill 

forms, grimaces, and superstitions. No expense 
is spared in serving God, so far as tlieir time and 
money are concerned. A cloak of humility is 
worn to cover their polluted garments of pride 
and selfishness. Under this cloak the devil is 
served in good earnest. Chains are fabricated 
for the poor, deceptions for the ignorant, and 
grievous yokes to place upon the necks of wor- 
shipers at the temples and altars. The small 
number of God's people who sojourn here are 
verily like sheep among ravenous wolves. The 
man of sin has troubled them, and by force im- 
prisoned the faithful missionary who leads the 
little band ; yet he is now set free, and they will 
rejoice, and listen again to the preached word 
of God. I have every reason to bless God that 
I am permitted to cast in my lot with theirs, and 
that I find myself more willing to suffer in their 
afflictions than to dwell in the splendid courts 
of the wicked. May the Lord make me useful in 
this new field on which I have entered ; and at all 
seasons, in all places, and in all performances, 
may I exert the influence of one of his disciples. 

Letter to his brother and sister in New 
York : — 

Buenos Ayres, Nov. 8. 

Dear Brother and Sister : I know not 
whether this will find you in New York, or, 



112 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

indeed, in any part of the land of the living ; 
but if, in the good providence of God, you are 
alive, this will be handed to you by my kind 
friend, Captain T. In a confinement of a fort- 
night to my bed, I experienced from him much 
kindness and attention ; and if you can have 
any idea of the value of a friend to a sick 
stranger in a strange land, you can judge how 
much I appreciate Captain T. He is a fellow- 
traveler with us toward Zion, and, as such, has 
been a great comfort to me in a dreary prospect. 
I am still weak and feeble ; but the fine beef of 
Buenos Ayres is fast assisting to restore me to 
my usual state. I have been hoping and pray- 
ing that you and yours, and all our friends, may 
escape the pestilence ; but the great distance 
between us veils many months of the past from 
my view. I beg you will write and persuade 
other friends to do so. 

To his twin brother he writes thus : — 

Nov. 9. 

I am getting quite familiar with the Spanish 
language. I hope soon to speak it well. Noth- 
ing makes me realize so much that I am away 
from home, as being compelled to jabber in an 
unknown tongue. I here write my first name 
thus — J'orge ; and am called by the natives (as 
it is customary for Spaniards always to call each 



TRAVELING IN THE INTERIOR. 113 

other by their Christian names) Don J'orge, 
which is pronounced Don HoWr-hee ; j and g 
before e, i, and ?/, having tlie Moorish or Arabic 
sound of a strongly aspirated A, as deep in the 
throat as you can get it. This sounds so little 
like the name of your twinwother, that I was 
called several times before I was aware that I 
was addressed. Now it is quite familiar. 

I expect to take a trip of about ninety miles 
into the country in a few days. I arm myself, 
as do all who accompany me, with a long knife, 
ground sharp on both edges, pistols, <fec. One 
American goes with me ; the rest are natives, 
who take peones, or servants, enough to enable 
lis to make a good stand against robbers should 
we be attacked. We go on horseback, and shall 
be absent about ten or fifteen days. Horses in 
this province are beautiful, and very cheap. A 
fine one can be bought in the country for ten or 
twelve Spanish dollars when broken to ride ; 
wild ones, for two or three dollars. A good 
horse will carry a man here eighty or ninety 
miles in ten or twelve hours, with the greatest 
ease. They have not the grace in their gait 
which our horses have at home ; but they are 
very fleet. I hope you are prosperous and suc- 
cessful in all your wishes, and, as one who 
speaks from experience, I say I hope you will 
never be obliged to quit our beloved America for 



114 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

a support. It would be somewhat remarkable 
if so large a family as ours, parents, children, 
and grandchildren, should escape the pesti- 
lence. It is a comfort to hope that so many are 
prepared to meet death, and a great cause for 
gratitude if we ar? indeed among the redeemed 
of the Lord. 

In the conclusion he says, " I have a most ex- 
tensive business, and, I assure you, much to do." 

It may not be amiss to state, that Mr. B. had 
the same business connections, and the same 
objects in view, which he had in visiting St. 
Domingo in the early part of this year. The 
object of the contemplated journey into the in- 
terior was to make purchases of wool, which 
was, and still is, a great article of export from 
Buenos Ayres. We have no account in his jour- 
nal or correspondence of the events of this jour- 
ney; but his visit to Monte Video, soon after 
this, was undoubtedly in pursuance of the same 
objects. The Christian reader, who knows .what 
it is to strive against temptations in prosperity, 
will not be surprised to find the following entry 
in his journal : — 

Buenos Ayres, Nov. 25, 1832. 

I find myself beset with snares on every side. 
I feel that it requires strength from above to 
escape them. An unheeding step drops me into 



TEMPTATIONS. 115 

a pit, an unguarded word involves me in many 
difficulties, and even my smallest actions seem 
to be scrutinized from the house tops ; while 
temptations, numerous as an army, are con- 
stantly presenting themselves before me, the 
tempter, no doubt, thinkii^ to be able to take 
me by surprise. With the minions of the ad- 
versary comes Mammon, and says, " You have 
extensive means, you may be rich, you may 
soon dwell at ease, and enjoy every blessing this 
world will afford, only do as I would have you ; 
fall down and worship me, and all is yours." 
Then comes that demon. Pride, as if to draw up 
a contract and get me to sign it, and thus seal, 
as it were, my fate. Thus does this army send 
up its ministers to teach from day to day, some- 
times coming under the walls of my citadel, 
sometimes, to my sorrow, gaining admission into 
the gates. Lord, strengthen me. When ex- 
alted most by others, then let me be lowest in 
dust before thee. When most successful in the 
business of life, oh ! then may I be most mindful 
of its uncertainties and vanities, and place my 
dependence most on God. 

To his brother hi Yale College : — 

Dec. 12. 

Dear Brother Edward : I suppose you would 
ask by this time how I like Buenos Ayres. In 



116 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

answer to which I can say, that it seems already- 
like a kind of home. I made a voyage last 
week to the Banda Oriental, a republic on the 
other side of the river. I was at Monte Video 
a few days, and can not express my pleasure at 
getting home, as I t#m this place. 

There is but little pleasure in navigating this 
mighty river. Its currents, banks, and shoals, 
its " pamperos," (violent gales,) are all to be 
dreaded and avoided. It has more the appear- 
ance of a sea of fresh water than a river. The 
land on the north bank of the river is undulat- 
ing, hilly, and a beautiful country. As I passed 
along the banks and gazed on shore, I could not 
but be reminded of the passage in Psalms, — 
" cattle on a thousand hills," — for the land was 
spotted with them. On this side the land is 
comparatively level. The " Pampas " (plains) 
are immense. The whole attention of this 
people seems turned to raising cattle. Thus 
far they resemble the Israelites ; and I often 
think of them when I go out to a " Mate- 
dero," (killing ground,) and fancy I see them 
preparing a great sacrifice, when I see a thou- 
sand slaughtered in a morning. 

Mr. B. suggests that a familiarity with such 
bloody sights might cause men to feel less com- 
punction in shedding human blood, and that 



MURDERS AND ASSASSINATIONS. 117 

this may account in some degree for the fre- 
quent murders and assassinations then taking 
place, of which he gives some instances. 

" The other day, at Monte Video, two soldiers 
of different parties were cajling each other by 
the names of their respective generals. They 
became incensed, and one declared to the other, 
that he would shoot him. The latter, having no 
musket, and seeing himself in his power, retired 
a few feet, drew his knife, and waited to receive 
the charge, desiring that it might be ' done well.' 
At the fatal shot he flew at the other, and with 
his knife pierced him to the heart. They fell 
and died together. This took place in a grog 
shop, at midday. A few days since I was in a 
distant part of this city, receiving some purchase, 
when one told me that in the same square a man 
had just killed his wife and three children, at 
noonday. Two of them were pursued into the 
street and there dispatched. The next day, or 
day after, I saw this same man tied to a post be- 
fore his own door and his brains blown out by 
five soldiers. Three Englishmen were buried 
on Monday last, all murdered within three miles 
from town. A native, the other day, went into 
the house of an American, and wished to know 
why he did not have the murdered man on his 
door step removed? The American went out 
to see, and found at noonday a man lying dead, 



118 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

with his throat cut. It is not amiss, I assure 
you, to have pistols loaded and primed at night. 
I keop mine by me, and sometimes take them 
with me in the evening when I expect to be out 

late." 

• 

Journal. — "Jan. 6. The celebration of the 
Lord's supper has occurred this day, and I have 
reason to be grateful that here I have had an 
opportunity of joining my fellow-Christians in 
this feast, and thus obeying the dying injunction 
of the Saviour, ' Do this in remembrance of 
me.' What a comfort, that we who have em- 
braced his cause are not obliged to go forth 
single-handed, but may by this union combine 
our strength to combat an opposing world ! 
How encouraging the declaration, ' No weapon 
that is formed against thee shall prosper ' ! 
Many stand surprised to see me espouse a cause 
so despised and derided in this ungodly city ; 
and nothing saves me from their contempt but 
the small share of worldly influence which I pos- 
sess over them, and their hope of keeping in my 
favor, and thus gaining some advantage in their 
selfish and worldly interests. I thank God I am 
not dependent upon them. I pray that I may 
acquire, by his grace, a steady and determined 
habit of performing my religious duties ; that I 
may never let the weakness of my nature so far 



THE SABBATH. 119 



overcome me as to make me ashamed of the 



cross, or shrink from its burden.' 



We close this chapter with the following lines, 
found in conjunction with the following entry in 
the journal: " Buenos Ayres, 10th Feb., 1833. 
I find comfort in getting out of the world, even 
for a few hours, on the Sabbath. 

« Thou sweet retirement — solitude ; 
The closed door — the silent room — 
The world shut out — the mind composed — 
When Sabbath dawns, and early hour, 
My soul awakes to utter prayer ; 
For then there 's none but God to hear 
The sighs I breathe, the words I raise ; 
For then there 's none but God to see 
^ly lifted hands, my weeping eyes. 
How sweet these moments, none can tell 
Who have not felt the power of love. 
I 'd spend my life in joys like these, 
Nor care for all the world affords,' " 



120 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Letters to his Brothers. — Some Hope of Revival. — Letter to his Sis- 
ter in K. — Strong Faith. — Extracts from Letters. — Goes up the 
Eiver Uruguay. — Letter to his Sister. — Letter to youngest 
Brother. 

He writes to his brother in Yale College : — 

Buenos Ayres, April 14, 1833. 

Dear Brother E. : Yoiir three welcome 
letters are before me. I find in your remarks 
much comfort and consolation. Sweet recol- 
lections of home do indeed often come over me, 
and my memory frequently and fondly retraces 
the joys, the sorrows, the hopes, and the fears of 
bygone days. As a Christian, and especially as 
a pilgrim, who has here no continuing city, I 
am often disposed to contemplate the heavenly 
country I am approaching ; and when, by the 
kind influences of the good Spirit, I enjoy any 
measure of assurance, I have only one more wish 
remaining, and that is, that I may be permitted 
to travel to the celestial city through my native 
land. I look upon this, however, as of little 
consequence ; since all who are truly dear to me 



PROTESTANT CONGREGATION. 121 

there, I hope to meet above ere long, if I should 
not be permitted to see them again on earth. 

You ask me several questions in regard to 
my situation and religious privileges. I am not 
destitute of spiritual food ; on the contrary, have 
more than this earthly nature hungers for or 
deserves. There is an American Presbyterian 
missionary here, and a little church to which 
he preaches, composed of people from Ireland, 
England, Scotland, and North America ; there is 
a Sabbath school, of thirty or forty children, 
(eight or nine of whom I teach ; ) besides an 
English church, and a Scotch church, both with 
pastors. The little church of the American 
minister is poor, and most of its members are, 
as Pollok says, " in lowly circumstances." This, 
however, does not prevent me from giving them 
all my influence and encouragement. At pres- 
ent I am the largest subscriber resident here, for 
the support of our minister, and am one of the 
committee of the church. Our clergyman is a 
man of ability, and I hope a faithful leader of 
his flock. We have many hinderances to our 
advancement, and many difficulties to be over- 
come. Strange as it may seem, the most are 
those raised by our own countrymen. We en- 
deavor to endure patiently all our crosses, and 
to bear reproach and shame patiently. We 
know in whom we trust, and humbly desire to 



122 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

contend faithfully against the flood of worldly 
opposition. At present our members are but 
few. We hope ere long they will Ibe increased, 
and that the fruits of the Sabbath school will be 
the salvation of many souls. 

It may not be amiss here to relate to you a 
circumstance which has recently occurred con- 
nected with missionary labors. It is owing to 
this circumstance that I am at home this Sab- 
bath evening ; otherwise I should have been at 
church. The day before yesterday our mission- 
ary here came to inform me that he i^ad been 
arrested, with an order from the judge ir pro- 
visor, to take him to prison. He had g }t a re- 
prieve until the next morning (yesterday) to 
get ready. His case admitted of no bail. It 
was for an alleged offense committed two or 
three years ago, and there was no getting off.* 
Yesterday morning I went with him to prison, 
and saw the poor man put into a cell with, two 
others, where criminals are put before death. 
There was no light but what the door admitted 
through a grate ; and the dirt and filth were 
abominable. I came out through two or three 
guards, and as many strong doors, most re- 
luctantly leaving him. Through the influence 



* The impression is that this ofTense was the performing' of a mar- 
riage ceremony, which was forbidden by law, except to Catholic 



PASTOR IN PRISON — IMMORALITY. 123 

of some friends, we got permission to move him 
to the " cuna," or common jail. I went to see 
him again last night, and found him in a room 
with about eight or ten other prisoners, men, 
women, and children, some drinking, others 
playing cards and gambling — all making con- 
siderable noise. 1 sent him down a bed to 
sleep on, and made some arrangements for his 
meals, and left him. To-day I have been to see 
him again. He was in the same dirty room, 
and his fellow-prisoners still gambling. I know 
not how long we shall be deprived of his ser=> 
vices. Perhaps a month, perhaps three months ; 
and it is possible he may be banished from the 
country. It is enough to know that he suffers 
unjustly ; and we commit the result of these op- 
pressive measures, on the part of the government, 
to God. This is the second time he has been 
imprisoned ; the time before was for three months. 
Our little church is almost inconsolable. 

You inquire something in regard to the mor- 
als of this country. I can say nothing favor- 
able : almost all is darkness, thick darkness ! 
There is much immorality. The Sabbath is 
kept by some good Catholics, and by the few 
foreigners who love the Lord Jesus ; but there 
are many natives and foreigners who abuse it 
shamefully. Drinking and gambling abound. 
Fights and quarrels are common. 



124 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MEBCHINT. 

To his father: — 

Buenos Ayres, April 21. 

My Dear Father: Your short, but good 
letter, of September 3, was received only a few 
days since. I can not tell what has kept it so 
long on the way ; but am glad it has come at 
last. I shall endeavor to profit by your kind 
admonition, " to be humble, devout, and cheer- 
ful, and do with consideration what my hand 
findeth to do." Here, (as one of my corre- 
spondents writes,) our north winds blow from the 
south, and our south winds from the north ; 
that is, cold weather comes from the south, and 
the warm and mild, from the north. Our cli 
mate here is delightful. In winter the ther- 
mometer varies from 55^ to 30°, and in sum- 
mer from 50° to 95°, and very seldom have 
we much frost. Do write me often. Every 
word from home is precious, and serves to 
sweeten the bitter which the distance leaves in 
my cup, and to make, in some measure, en- 
durable the difficult and lonely path of my pil- 
grimage. 

My business occupies almost my whole time 
and attention, and frequently the midnight bell 
of the convent is tolling before I have finished 
my day's labor. I send you by the ship which 
brings this, a tiger skin, which you can have 
dressed, and use as a mat. It will give you an 



PRAYER MEETINGS IN PRISON. 125 

idea of the South American tiger. Accept the 
love and best wishes of jour affectionate son. 

Geo. W. Blake. 

In his journal of April 27, he says, — 
" I have renewed my covenant, and entered 
into more solemn vows to my gracious God to 
be faithful and devoted to his cause. I have 
enjoyed some precious seasons, in the prison and 
in our social meetings, the past week." 

These precious seasons in the prison were 
undoubtedly spent in united prayer with the 
man of God, there incarcerated ; and the men- 
tion of the social meetings show that, as in the 
case of Peter, prayer was made without ceasing 
by the church in their affliction. 

Letter to his twin brother : — 

May 22. 

Dear Brother John: I find myself often, 
when a leisure moment leaves me to myself, 
looking back on the past. The objects that ap- 
peared large in my childhood now seem puny 
things, and every succeeding day leaves them 
with fainter outlines upon my memory. My 
friends alone stand out in bold relief, and it 
affords a kind of melancholy pleasure to my 
mind to recall their features and their forms. 
You are often a subject for me, dear John, and 



126 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

I have your visage before me on no small num- 
ber of occasions. We set out together to travel 
through this world. Our paths have parted, but 
not our affections. 

You may think, as I perceive that many of 
my correspondents do, that I am a kind of iso- 
lated being in Buenos Ayres, going through my 
daily routine of business with but few of the 
social and religious duties resting upon me 
which I should find in the United States ; but 
sucli is not the case. Aside from my business, 
which demands much of my time, I have many 
duties, and many cares, as a Christian, and as a 
social being. We have here our church, and, 
unlike the flourishing churches of the States, 
it requires the vigorous action of every member 
to sustain it amid a thousand dangers. We 
have a Sabbath school, with abundant labors. 
We have here the careless to warn, the hard- 
ened to reprove, the straying to recover, the 
mourner to comfort, and the afflicted to counsel. 
The hand of misery is often extended for relief, 
and the groans of poverty and distress are often 
sounding in our ears. Where there is one cry 
for charity with you, there are a hundred here. 
Where your exertions are once demanded at 
home for the cause of souls, here there is an 
unceasing necessity. Where tears start with 
you, here the heart bleeds, and tales of woe are 



INCREASED RELIGIOUS LABORS. 127 

not wanting to make life sickening, and to con- 
vince one, without a doubt, that man is made to 
mourn. 

Our little church is a city set on a hill ; and 
while it is, in some measure, a rendezvous for all 
who love the Lord, it is also a target for the 
devil and his emissaries ; and the latter collect 
together in great numbers in this place, all the 
nations of Europe and America furnishing their 
quotas ; and these foreign legions are generally 
the best servants of Satan, they, having learned 
their trade in the light, and knowing better how 
to carry it on in darkness. We have had our 
minister taken from us and confined in prison, 
now six weeks. My duties are increased by 
this misfortune, inasmuch as I am called to 
read a sermon every Sabbath to the congrega- 
tion, and have, what we used to call, a deacon's 
meeting. The meetings are quite full ; some 
who never came before — captains and supercar- 
goes — now coming, as they say, to hear Mr. 
Blake preach. We have our evening meetings 
as at home ; but instead of being many we are 
few. I connect myself with all societies here 
for doing good, and do all I can to sustain and 
support them. 

Since I have been in Buenos Ayres the Amer- 
icans here have raised, by subscription, about 
nine thousand dollars, and bought a burying 



128 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MEBCHANT. 

ground for our countrymen. For this I have 
been obliged to contribute, and, as a siibscriber, 
am entitled to a grave, should I want one. I 
happen to be the secretary, and keep the records 
for the trustees. This will, no doubt, be use- 
ful to me in reminding me at every interment 
of my own exit. It is a gratification to us, 
whose lot is cast in Buenos Ayres, to know that 
our bones will not go begging for graves should 
we die here. Our cemetery is a very pretty spot ; 
and it may be to you a consolation, in case of my 
death, to know thus much about the place. 

May 24. — To-day, the people are making 
great arrangements for celebrating the anni- 
versary of their independence, 25th of May here 
being the same as 4th of July at home. But 
liberty here is as bad as slavery with you. The 
occasion reminds me, however, of the free insti- 
tutions of our own country, and the happiness 
they confer on every good citizen, and makes me 
doubly prize them. 

Journal. 

Buenos Ayres, July 14, 1833. 

I feel that the Lord has been with us the past 
week. A f^ are evidently alive in this wilder- 
ness. One or two hardened, impenitent sinners 
have been awakened and apparently regenerated, 



SOCIETY IN BUENOS AYRES. 129 

and some drops, in various places, indicate a 
shower. I feel that I have much evil to eradi- 
cate, and should gain much warmth and zeal 
before I am fit to labor among the tender plants 
which are springing up from the refreshing 
effects of this gracious rain. 

Letter to his sister in K., N. H. : — 

Aug. 13. 

Dear Sister E. : You inquire about society 
and the Sabbath schools here. Of the first, we 
have both native and foreign. I have mingled 
but little in either, enough only to become 
acquainted with its character. They who attend 
parties, or " tertulias," as we call them here, are 
only to be amused by card-playing and dancing ; 
conversation on any thing but light subjects is 
thought to be rather boorish, and is seldom 
attempted. 

[Mr. B. then speaks of the church and Sabbath 
school, and adds,] I find here a wide field for 
religious enterprise, and have no time to stand 
still. My situation in business relations gives 
me some influence, and I endeavor to use it 
aright. Another young American and myself, 
who are determined to support the gospel here, 
pay, for this present year, half of our minister's 
salary. We were distressed at his having been 
9 



f 

130 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

imprisoned two months by the government dur- 
ing the past season. 

I am placed above the reproach of the vulgar 
more than if I was in the United States ; and 
the stand which I took in religious matters on 
my first arrival here, and which I have per- 
suaded two or three others to take, has been, I 
think, very beneficial to ourselves and to the 
cause of religion. Many who were disposed to 
scoff and rail, seek now our acquaintance for 
business purposes, and to please us, remain in 
peace and quiet. We have lately had a little 
reviving, and two or three have been hopefully 
converted, which is very encouraging in such a 
community. 

What encouragement to him who walks in a 
snary path ! If he overcome, he shall not only 
be blessed in this world, but a crown of life 
shall be given him in the next. Be blessed with 
what ? Kiches of this world ? No ; but with 
the light of God's countenance, and his loving 
kifidness, which are infinitely better. And the 
crown ! Shall it be like the crown of the kings 
of the earth? Unstable, uncertain, and often 
bringing death on him who wears it ? No ; it 
shall be a crown of life — eternal life and 
glory I It will not be as the insignia of kings 
and priests unto men, but of kings and priests 



ASPIRATIONS — STUDYING SPANISH. 131 

unto God ! Who would not run for such a 
prize ? Who would not struggle to attain it ? 
Thou, my soul, hast entered the lists ; thou hast 
become a candidate for such an honor ! Throw 
aside the weighty encumbrances which bow thee 
to the earth. Be not so much conformed to the 
world. Seek not so much the friendship of 
worldly men. Look not so much on earthly 
things, and thou shalt have grace to look above, 
and patience given thee to endure to the end. 

From numerous letters, filled with business 
items, written to his brother in Boston, we have 
extracted a few paragraphs. In speaking of the 
imprisonment of the missionary, he says, ''Tliese 
oppressions of the pope's satellites are very 
burdensome on those who are interested in the 
preaching of the gospel here." As there were 
so few who were disposed to do any thing " to 
help keep the little fire burning," he mentions 
what he had felt obliged to give, and adds, " I 
hope that a kind Providence will enable me to 
afford this. The preaching of the gospel, and 
its accompanying privileges, are a great comfort 
to me here." Under same date, he says, " What 
time I can command from business and other 
duties, I devote to studying the Spanish lan- 
guage, whicli is no very pleasant labor wlien 
one's head is full of dollars and cents. I make 



132 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

some progress, however. My time for this is 
between ten and two o'clock in the night ; but 
I am determined to persevere. If I am remiss 
in writing, you must attribute it to this. I do 
not, however, intend to be so." Again, under a 
date in June, he writes, "I almost envy you the 
fine New England summer you are now en- 
joying, while here we are taking our tvinter, 
with cold, rainy days, and muddy streets. Well, 
it is late ; the bells are ringing to call up the 
nuns in yonder convent, to say their midnight 
prayers. This reminds me that it is time to say 
my own, and retire to rest." 

Toward the close of a letter, dated July 15th, 
he says, " I have now been about a year from 
Boston. Years fly apace, and I feel that if 
spared to threescore and ten, they would soon 
be gone. An inch or two of time, a butterfly's 
summer, and we are gone for ever. 

I shall leave the city in a few days, to take a 
journey up the rivers Uruguay and Parana, some 
four to six hundred miles, and may be gone 
four or five weeks. I have been very busy in 
getting the necessary outfit. I am obliged to 
dress up a la mode du pays, to go safely; shall 
wear constantly in my belt a long, sharp-pointed 
knife and four loaded pistols, and, if attacked, 
shall sell my life as dearly as possible. I do not 
anticipate much danger, although such journeys 
are always attended with more or less of it. 



AT MERCEDES. 133 

In his journal he writes : — 

Mercedes, (on the Rio Negro,*) Oct. 4. 

I left Buenos Ayres on Thursday, 26th ult., 
and arrived at this place on the 30th. I sit 
down among strangers and foreigners to record 
the goodness of God in preserving me hitherto, 
and sustaining me in the midst of dangers. I 
have formed some acquaintances, and seen many 
things strange and new. So far I have seen 
little good. Oh, how few are the disciples of the 
blessed Jesus ! When will this extensive and 
beautiful country bear the fruits of the gospel, 
and be beautified with the rising churches of our 
Redeemer ! Oh, how earnestly should I pray. 
Thy kingdom come I I often hear the exclama- 
tion, " Oh, if we had peace but a few years, how 
would our country prosper ! " and I can not but 
exclaim. Oh, if ye had that peace of God which 
passeth all understanding, then might you talk 
of prosperity, not for this life only, bu.t for life 
everlasting ! 

St. Domingo de Soriano, 

(Rio Negro,) Sunday, Oct. 6. 

Seated on the banks of this beautiful river, 
and beholding all that is lovely in nature, I look 
in vain for some fellow-pilgrim with whom I 
may take sweet counsel upon heavenly things. 

* A branch of the Uruguay. 



134 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN BIERCHANT. 

I find pleasure in writing down with my pencil 
what I can not express with my tongue. The 
continued goodness of God is signally manifest 
in upholding and directing my steps. While all 
about me are engaged in the various amuse- 
ments of a Catholic festival, little thinking of 
the great Being whose day they are misspending, 
and to whom they must at last render a solemn 
account, I am enabled to enjoy the presence 
of my dear Saviour, to entertain this precious 
Friend, unknown to them; and he condescends 
to come and sup with me. While they seem 
left to hasten their own destruction with their 
mirth and wine, 

«* Send comforts, Lord, from thy right hand, 
To cheer me in this desert land ; 
And even here, oh, let me know, 
The joys that from thy presence flow ! " 

Soriano, (on Eio Negro,) Oct. 11. 

These people talk of pleasure in spending 
whole nights in dancing and dissipation, and 
wonder that I can not enjoy it. They heartily 
despise me because I do not mingle with them 
in their rioting. It grieves me to think of the 
destination of these mortals when they have 
filled up the measure of their days in trifling 
and wantonness. God, I thank thee that I 
do not enjoy their enjoyments, nor find pleasure 
in their pleasures. 



CATHOLIC FEASTS. 135 

Mercedes, Saturday Evening, Oct. 12. 

Arrived from Soriano. I find myself situated 
in a family of the country, who little understand 
my feelings. They are full of conversation, but 
how little of a spiritual nature is there among 
the votaries of the Catholic church. These are 
her children. I have witnessed one of her feasts 
the past week, and have become acquainted with 
several of the padres, or fathers. All is external 
show among them. The devil is served and 
God is forgotten. 

" Here Ceremony sends her bigots forth, 
Prepared to fight for shadows of no -worth ; 
While Truth, on which eternal things depend, 
Finds not, or hardly finds, a single friend." 

Puerto St. Rosaria, (on the East Bank 
of the Rio Uruguay,) Sunday, Oct. 22. 

Surrounded by a drinking, disorderly com- 
pany, I am grateful that I find One near, whose 
kind influences I have often felt, and who, 
though unseen, sticketh closer than a brother. 
How regardless of the future do these people 
seem ! How little can they appreciate my feel- 
ings. I am thankful that God knows even what 
can not be expressed, and that while there is no 
sweet converse without, I can hold sweet inward 
communion with him. 



136 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Paysa>^deii, 27th Oct. 

I have been preserved and brought to this 
place by the kind providence of God. Health, 
the best of Heaven's blessings, (after the gift of 
eternal life,) has been granted. I have found 
in this wilderness one of the Lord's flock, whom 
I have seen, and with whom I have worshiped 
before. I have been permitted to join daily with 
him in supplication in behalf of ourselves, and 
this poor, perishing people. This Sabbath we 
spend together, and it is delightful. We are 
reminded of the numerous assemblies in Chris- 
tendom, who are this day sending their suppli- 
cations to heaven. And while we recall the 
places where we have mingled our voices, and 
made our solemn vows to God with them, and 
while we reflect that, though we are now sepa- 
rated, their prayers still ascend for us, and ere 
long we shall meet to part no more, we forget, 
in our joy, that we are alone, and we almost 
fancy ourselves among them. 

Buenos Ayres, 15th Nov. 

My Dear Father: Before me lies your 
much esteemed favor of 17th May. It does me 
much good to see, now and then, something from 
you. Your letters not only bring before me 
your own image, but remind me of all about 
you. I often trace back the long road I have 



RETURN TO BUENOS AYRES. 137 

wandered to get at such a distance from home, 
but such is my haste to arrive at the old man- 
sion that I pass by every thing that intervenes, 
without bestowing even a thought, and ere I am 
aware, I am knocking at the door and shaking 
hands with all. You speak of the goodly quan- 
tity of fruit which the season promises, but ere 
I hear of it, " the harvest is past, the summer is 
ended ! " 

I returned a few days since, after an ab- 
sence of six weeks, from a voyage up the large 
and beautiful River Uruguay, in which I had a 
fine opportunity of seeing a considerable portion 
of the interior of this country. Here, in Buenos 
Ayres, we have had a revolution, and for two or 
three weeks there was much fighting and dis- 
turbance. It gives me pleasure, however, to 
state, that we are now becoming settled again 
under a new governor. The chiefs of the con- 
quered party are making their escape to other 
provinces. Only one or two foreigners became 
victims to the anarchy which prevailed ; but 
several of the natives were killed in their skir- 
mishes. 



138 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER X. 

Journal at Monte Video. — Dearth of Religious Privileges. — Returns 
to the United States. — Tour to the Western States. — Letters.— 
Uncertainty in Regard to his future Course. — Leaves Boston for 
Buenos Ayres. 

Monte Video, 29th Dec. 

This is the third Sabbath I have been in this 
place. Desolate indeed, in respect to religion, 
I have found it. I sit alone in my room, though 
I trust I am not deprived of the presence of my 
Saviour. My Spanish Bible near me, requires 
but a look to speak and preach ; and certainly 
I could not hear a better sermon, since, " Toda 
escritura divinamente inspirada es util para 
ensener^ para reprehender^ para corregir, e para 
instruir en la j'usticia, para que el hombre de 
Dios sea perfecto^ y este prevenido para toda 
obra huenar 2 Tim. 3 : 16, 17. 

My hymn book, though in another tongue, 
says, 

<< God is in heaven, but men below ; 
Be short our tunes, our words be few ; 
A sacred reverence checks our songs. 
And praise sits silent on our tongues." 

Prayer requires no sanctuary to be offered 
in but that of the heart from which it proceeds ; 



WORSHIP ON SHIPBOARD. 139 

if, therefore, all is right within, why should I 
mourn that I am not among God's people, and 
that I can not visit his house and enjoy in pub- 
lic the ordinances of religion ? It would be more 
agreeable, but even here I may find enough to 
make the heart glad and the tongue to sing for 
joy. I find much comfort in reading some few 
religious papers which the waves have borne to 
me from a distant land. They tell me of the 
advancement of the Redeemer's kingdom in dif- 
ferent parts of the world ; and I take encourage- 
ment in hoping that the time is not far distant 
when we shall see the Sun of Righteousness 
rising over this dark land with healing in his 
beams. 

Monte Video, Feb. 2. 

During the last month I have had the op- 
portimity of spending my Sabbaths on shipboard 
in the harbor, where I have been permitted to 
join in religious services, conduct;ed by a pious 
master with his crew. These have been pleas- 
ant, and, I trust, profitable seasons to me, and 
to all concerned. It was gratifying to me to 
meet an assembly of these sons of the ocean. 
My feelings are much interested for them. 

BrENOs Ayres, Sunday, Feb. 23. 

I arrived two weeks since from Monte Video. 
This is the last Sabbath I expect to spend in 



140 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Buenos Ayres. My passage to a better country 
is engaged, and I have the land of my fathers 
in view. I have been permitted to address the 
Sabbath school this afternoon, and in my fare- 
well, once more to remind them of those things 
which concern their everlasting peace. 

At Sea, Lon. 30 W., Lat. 28 S., 23d March. 
Sailed from Buenos Ayres on the first instant, 
and this is now the fourth Sabbath I have spent 
on " the great deep." We have made but little 
progress on our voyage, and our captain has had 
his patience severely tried by contrary winds. I 
have endeavored to be contented, knowing that 
all is for the best. I have felt almost unfitted 
for enjoyment in any form, not only because of 
the transition from land to sea, but because of 
the constant reiteration of profane oaths, by 
cabin boy, master, and sailors. I had hoped for 
a better state of things before I came on board, 
and am sadly disappointed. I am sometimes 
overwhelmed with the thought of the goodness 
of God in preserving such beings as we are. I 
am enough in myself to sink the ship, and am 
sure that all the rest are guilty of casting off 
fear and restraining prayer, practically saying, 
" What is the Almighty, that we should serve 
him, and what profit should we have, if we pray 
unto him ? " It is my daily prayer that I may 



RETURNS TO BOSTON. 141 

live consistently before these men, for I know 
that they watch for my downfall. I feel that if 
there is any way of doing good here, it is by 
example rather than by precept. 

I look back upon the field of my labors the 
past year and a half with mingled feelings of 
pleasure and pain. I can not forget the little 
number in that strange land with whom I have 
shared in spiritual joys and sorrows. The link 
is not severed by the distance, and as a part of 
the same body, I suffer in their sufferings and 
rejoice in their rejoicings. It is my most earnest 
desire that I may be made the means of 
good to them and to the multitudes perishing 
around, even though separated from them. I 
hope and pray that God may enable me to inter- 
est some of his children in their behalf, in the 
more favored land of my birth. 

Mr. Blake arrived in Boston on the 11th of 
May, after a passage of seventy-one days ; and 
after spending a short time among his friends, 
he indulged in a wish long felt, to visit the west- 
ern parts of our country, not without some idea 
of purchasing land at a future time, and perhaps 
fixing on a permanent residence there. On this 
journey he visited several of our western cities, 
and enjoyed his trip very much ; but hastened 
his return, that he might fulfil an engagement 



142 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

to take a short voyage on the coast of Maine with 
his father, with the hope of benefiting the health 
of the latter, and interesting his mind ; to which 
trip he alludes in the following letter to his 
brother in college : — 

Boston, Sept. 1, 1834. 

Dear Brother E. : You inquire respecting 
my excursion with our father to Maine. The 
jaunt was not very pleasant, owing to his weak- 
ness and the many inconveniences which will 
ever arise to the traveling invalid. We visited 
the cities of Portland and Bangor, the towns of 
Belfast and Bucksport, with some few others 
of less note. Father was somewhat seasick, 
and returned considerably exhausted, not having 
gained the advantage to his health which I had 
fondly hoped. 

[In the same letter he says, ''I will endeavor to 
answer, in some degree, your question proposed 
in your last — ' Would a republican form of 
government be better than a monarchical for 
tlie South American States ? ' "] 

The South American States have as yet no 
foundation laid for republican institutions ; and 
although the name may exist, yet it is as impos^ 
sible that they should be republics in their pres- 
ent condition, as that a building should stand 
without support. It is a question with me, 



THE SOUTH AMERICAN STATES. 143 

whether they shoiikl bear the name until a future 
generation, more enhghtened than the present, 
shall arise to improve the advantages which a 
solid reconstruction would confer ; or whether 
it is best for them at once to create a monarch, 
or monarchs, to restore good order. However, 
I incline more decidedly to the first ; for although 
the last might be better for the present genera- 
tion, yet it would entail greater evils on the 
next, and so on for the future ; and the igno- 
rance of the people would be the constant apology 
for arbitrary power in all coming time. Where- 
as, the name of republic will stimulate their 
youth to desire the institutions of the United 
States, ours being generally considered by them 
the leading republic ; and there is a possibility — 
not to say a strong probability — that in one or 
two generations they may succeed in shaking 
off their wild notions of government, and with 
more light, make a good and happy people. A 
great obstacle, however, to the advancement of 
knowledge among them is their revolutionary 
spirit, causing dissensions and civil war; calling 
the young men from their schools and colleges, 
and encouraging too much a taste for military 
pursuits. It is to be hoped, however, that the 
poverty to which they must sooner or later 
reduce themselves by tliis course, will be a salu- 
tary check. 



144 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

In the fall of 1834, Mr. Blake resumed and 
completed his tour of the Western and Southern 
States, and returned to Boston by ship from 
Charleston, S. C, arriving on the 29th of No- 
vember. He then engaged to remain with his 
uncle for the next six months. Soon after, we 
find him writing to his brother, in Yale College, 
as follows : — 

Boston, Feb. 16, 1835. 

Dear Brother E. : I have had my thoughts 
occupied of late with reflections on God's mys- 
terious providences, and that in particular which 
removed our beloved Dr. Wisner from among us. 
leaving tlie place he has so faithfully filled here 
to know him no more for ever. I shall ever 
esteem it an honor to have enjoyed an acquaint- 
ance with him here on earth, and I look forward 
with joy to a renewal of it in eternity. How 
does the sudden demise of so useful an individ- 
ual remind us that the ways of our heavenly 
Father are not our ways, nor his thoughts our 
thoughts. 

I arrived at W the next day after leaving 

you, and spent the Sabbath there. I attended 
church with our aged father. The new church 
is a very handsome edifice ; but I found it ex- 
tremely difficult to recognize some of the con- 
gregation in their new places. Formerly, in the 
old church, I was enabled to know each by his 



CHANGES IN WESTBORO'. 145 

accustomed place. Nor did the wrinkles, the 
baldness, or the gray hairs, (sad emblems of 
passing time,) present any great obstacle to a 
speedy recognition ; but now, alas ! the natural 
order of things seems to be entirely changed, 
at least so far as going to meeting is concerned. 
You know that in youth we get certain im- 
pressions of scenes and localities which no cir- 
cumstances can make us forget, and no time 
obliterate. Fixed in my mind most indelibly 
are the old meeting-house, the assembled con- 
gregation, the green galleries, the square pews, 
the railing on stilts, forming pretty holes for 
children to peep through. The banging of seats, 
publishments, gatherings in the porches, deacons^ 
seats, and old men's seats ; these are all present 
to my mind, but the reality is gone for ever! 
The village, too, is strangely metamorphosed. 
The people, also, are city-like, with none of that 
rustic curiosity of former years. Whether they 
have become weary with staring, since the rail- 
road reached them, or whether they have other 
and graver business on hand, I know not — but 
they are much changed. • 

To the same : — 

Boston, April 20. 

Dear Brother E. : It gives me much pleas- 
ure to hear that there is a revival in the college. 
10 



146 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

I doubt not you are active, and receive an 
abundant share of those high and delightful 
emotions which so much abound in those pre- 
cious seasons. If you can get any time, I would 
fain have you communicate some of your glad 
tidings. In this city there seems at the present 
time to be the greatest indifference in regard to 
religion, and no signs of a change. 

I have been reading the lives of some emi- 
nent missionaries, such as Martyn, Gordon Hall, 
Schwartz, &c., with some works on missions. I 
have been much interested, and the more I have 
investigated the matter the more I am con- 
vinced of its vast importance. I have almost 
been constrained to become a missionary myself, 
although too much of my life has passed to 
think of it now. I do firmly believe, that if the 
religion of our Lord Jesus Christ was understood 
and practiced as it was in apostolic times, and as 
it ought to be understood and practiced now, we 
should see a different state of things among pro- 
fessing Christians. Every young man would 
become a preacher, teacher, or missionary. The 
fact is, that too much is thought of this world. 
Where is the Christian that is really ready to 
forsake all and follow Christ ? Let us bless 
God that there are a few such, and mourn that 
there are no more. I hope you will by all means 
become a preacher. It is in reality the only 



REMARKS ON SINGING. 147 

profession worth living for. I wish you God- 
speed. And if God hears my poor prayers and 
answers them you will be blessed. 

I hope you made up your mind to attend 
those lessons in vocal music which were about 
to commence when I was at New Haven. It 
will be a great advantage to you. You will find 
it strengthen your lungs, improve your voice, 
and, above all, will enable you to impart and 
receive much comfort in singing the praises of 
Jehovah. It is a .pity that so few of our young 
men should acquire the art of singing. The 
most solemn addresses to the Deity are sung in 
our churches often by thoughtless young people 
without piety. How strange that the church, 
while so particular in selecting sojjie of those 
who are to lead her devotions, should be so 
utterly heedless in respect to others ! Would 
they be content to have a minister merely 
because he had a fine voice, whatever his 
conduct or disposition might be ? In my 
opinion, every one who can, should learn to 
sing. 

My six months with uncle J. W. have nearly 
expired. Do not think if I should go again ere 
long to South America, or to the West, that it is 
to satisfy a roving disposition. Nothing would 
be more agreeable to me than a still, quiet life. 
And my movements hitherto have only been to 



148 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

enable me to secure such a desideratum. My 
taste for ajq[uiet life may induce me to become a 
farmer, should I find a favorable opening, and 
also a field to do good in a moral point of view. 
I need not tell you that my views are not extrav- 
agant; a moderate support, a library, a little 
time for the cultivation of the mind, and an 
opportunity to relieve the wants and distresses 
of my fellow-men, these, with health and the 
smiles of Providence, are all I aspire to in this 
life ; and in such circumstances, whether in 
Asia, Europe, or America, I would cheerfully 
wait for that transition, which I trust would 
carry me to a better world. 

To the same : — 

Boston, May 16. 

Dear Brother : Your letter of the 20th ult., 
containing an account of the revival in college, 
was deeply interesting to me. Good tidings are 
always precious ; and when they relate to those 
whose influence, for or against religion, must be 
great for life, announcing them born again, and 
throwing that influence on the Lord's side, it is 
verily good tidings of great joy. 

I fully agree with you in your remarks re- 
specting faith. It has often been with me a 
subject of reflection that such momentous truths 
as Christians profess to believe have so little 



EMBARKATION OF MISSIONARIES. 149 

visible effect upon tlieir lives. It will not seem 
strange that infidelity abounds when we remem- 
ber the inconsistencies and imperfections of those 
who denominate themselves the disciples of our 
Lord. I know many professing Christians whose 
atmosphere (if I may so call it) is like that of an 
iceberg at sea. We can not approach them with- 
out being chilled. Such are generally sur- 
rounded, like the ice island, with a fog ; and, 
though unseen and perhaps unheard, their chill- 
ing influence will uot be unfelt. But it may be 
better that I look more at my own faults and 
less at those of others. 

Last Sunday Mr. Winslow, formerly mission- 
ary to Ceylon, delivered an address to several 
missionaries about to leave for Persia and Hin- 
dostan ; and to-day, those for the latter place 
sailed. I had the pleasure of being present. 
They were cheerful, though it seemed to require 
an effort to be so. Many that stood by us mocked 
as the exercises customary on sucli occasions 
were in progress. Some made a noise. One 
remarked that they were beside tliemselves. 
But my heart went with the voyagers. My 
prayer for them Avas unceasing. I am far from 
feeling that degree of sympathy arising from the 
consideration that they are leaving home, friends, 
and country, which excites so many. Why 
should there be more of this in the case of the 



150 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

missionary than in the case of the man of busi- 
ness ? Perhaps it is said of the man who goes 
for gold, that his hopes and expectations of gain 
are sufficient to support him and his friends 
under a separation. But he who goes to seek 
the salvation of souls receives as much pity and 
commiseration as if he was going only to be dis- 
appointed ; as if there were no returns, and no 
reward. It may be said that the traveler is 
cheered with the hope of return to his friends. 
But has not the missionary the same hope, 
although not in this life, yet is it not doubly 
precious from the consideration that it will be 
with the redeemed of the Lord ? Am I right in 
believing that more persons would become mis- 
sionaries if less mention was made of the great 
sacrifice it required ? Does not this deter many ? 
For my part, joy more than sorrow predomi- 
nates when parting with those who go to make 
known the unsearchable riches of Christ. If a 
tear falls, it is a joyful one. 

To his sister in Keene : — 

Boston, May 19. 

Dear Sister E. : I have reflected on your 
remarks prompted by the idea I suggested of be- 
coming a missionary. I had given up the idea 
when I received your letter, but seriously recon- 
sidered the matter, and although the conclusion 



VARIOUS SCHEMES. 151 

I have come to will not allow me to take advan- 
tage of the plan Mr. B. has so kindly proposed, 
I feel truly grateful for it. Of the importance 
of missionary enterprises, and the duty of young 
men to come forward to this work, I am fully 
convinced, and more so latterly than I have ever 
been before. I can not now, for want of time, 
state fully the reasons which have brought me 
to the determination to remain a layman, and 
do all the good I can for the cause of my blessed 
Master in that capacity. 

During some months of this season Mr. B. had 
various plans under consideration in regard to 
his course after he should have finished his tem- 
porary engagement in the counting-room of his 
uncle. Probably there are few young men who 
have not at some seasons clouds of uncertainty 
hanging over them. How much they need at 
such a time, as ballast to the soul, a firm assur- 
ance that they have a friend in that Being who 
is the fountain of wisdom. That our young 
friend had this confidence his letters at this time 
leave no room to doubt ; they show that amid all 
his perplexity it was his first and ruling desire 
to honor his Redeemer and promote his cause. 
It would have been delightful to him, on many 
accounts, to remain in Boston. There, and in 
the vicinity, were his friends and kindred. To 



152 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

these he was bound by strong ties. There also 
he was enjoying high religious privileges, and 
like the disciples on the mount, he felt it good to 
be there. But it is not all of life to be receiv- 
ing and enjoying our good things while many 
are perishing without them. He felt that he 
had duties to his fellow-men which might now 
demand a sacrifice on his part, and he believed 
that while pursuing his business he might render 
more service to the cause of his Redeemer in 
some other place where his efforts were more 
needed. 

About this time his youngest brother, who con- 
templated teaching in one of the Middle States, 
proposed to Mr. B. to join him in opening a 
school. In answer to this proposal he writes as 
follows : — 

Boston, Sept. 10, 1835. 

My Dear Brother E. : Yours of last Tues- 
day has just come to hand, in answer to which 
I am compelled reluctantly to say that I can not 
join you. I do it reluctantly, because I fear it 
may be a present disappointment to you ; but 
when I think of the future, or the result, I do it 
most willingly, for, in the capacity your gener- 
osity would place me, I should prove, what sea- 
men term, but " a spare pump," utterly useless. 
I have the highest opinion of the profession of a 



REASONS FOR NOT ENTERING THE MINISTRY. 153 

teacher, its usefulness, its respectability, its 
patriotism, its benevolence, and if a few years 
less had gone over my head, the situation you 
offer me, I might, at least, make an attempt to 
fill. 

A few months since I had serious thoughts of 
studying for the ministry, but after much reflec- 
tion I gave it up from a sense of duty. I have 
learned, at great expense and sacrifice, the busi- 
ness of a merchant, and have acquired informa- 
tion and experience which I think qualify me, 
with the exercise of Christian motives, for use- 
fulness, perhaps more than any other profession, 
acquired at this late day, could. One who gets 
an education or learns a trade entirely new to 
him, commencing after living in the world one 
third of a century, is never but half learned, and 
in the present age of wisdom above that which 
is written, is esteemed to be neither one thing 
nor the other — a half-breed. I concluded, there- 
fore, *to pass my life as a layman, knowing that 
belonging to that class did not by any means 
exclude a man from usefulness. And if Provi- 
dence opens my way in mercantile business, I 
shall endeavor to strengthen the hands and 
encourage the hearts of the faithful, by word or 
deed, as I have opportunity. I confess that at 
present I see no good way of taking advantage of 
the information I have been at so much pains to 



154 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

obtain ; and I am determined, (if the Lord will, 
always^) in case I can not make myself useful as 
a merchant, to endeavor to do so in the guise of 
a humble farmer, an occupation I am not entirely 
ignorant of. The West is my favorite field, and 
if such a destination is the will of Providence, I 
should hope some time or other to do good to 
some of the sons of the prairies, and afterward to 
lay my bones beneath the clods of the valley of 
the Mississippi. 

I am now negotiating for some business at 
Mobile, in Alabama, and shall decide to-night or 
to-morrow whether to fix my residence there for 
'a few years or not. I doubt not the field is as 
extensive for doing good as any other. Indeed 
I know it is, and that is the main thing that will 
reconcile me to staying there. 

If this fails, (that is, the project for going- 
South,) I have some idea of accepting an offer 
to visit Europe and spend the year to come 
in England, France, and Spain, and perhaps 
some part of it on the north coast of Africa, say 
Barbary, in the prosecution of a mercantile busi- 
ness. On the other hand, if I do not do this, 
Mr. W. is plying me with offers to remain with 
him in Boston on a salary. One thing is certain, 
a week will decide which way my steps shall 
tend, and I pray God to do with me as seemeth 
to him good. 



RETURNS TO BUENOS AYRES. 155 

I am truly glad you have before you so good 
a prospect, my brother. You will be prospered ; 
be strong, be courageous. I can not doubt your 
success. Never suffer yourself to think that you 
shall not be successful. You can say, and may 
find the benefit of saying, as I have often done 
in regard to other things, I know how to do it, 
and if any body can do it, I can. I mean noth- 
ing to the prejudice of trusting in Providence, 
you will understand, of course. Don't expect 
too much. Disappointment is bad, but to realize 
more than you expect is good. Do not depend 
too much on the statements of others, and par- 
ticularly of those interested. I am accustomed 
to subtract, in such cases, fifty per cent. My 
heart is with you wherever you locate yourself, 
and my prayers will not cease to rise for your 
prosperity and happiness. Do you remember our 
family concert of prayer ? ' I have enjoyed much 
from keeping it in mind the last three or four 
months. We pray for you to-morrow evening. 

The same evening, after writing the above, a 
proposal was made to him to go again to Buenos 
Ayres, which he accepted. From on board the 
steamer on his way to New York to take passage 
for South America, he wrote to the same brother 
informing him of his destination. He adds, " I 
may return in a year or two, should I live, and 



156 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

God is willing. How much I feel like a stranger 
and a pilgrim at this moment, I leave you to in- 
fer. May God bless you." 

Journal. 

At Sea, Lat. N. 7°, Lon. W. 28°. 

Sabbath, Nov. 1, 1835. How wonderfully am 
I preserved amid dangers seen and unseen ! 
Though I wander far from my home and coun- 
try, even to the uttermost parts of the sea, blessed 
be God ! even here shall his hand lead me, and 
his right hand shall hold me. Surely his eye is 
upon all them that fear him ; upon such as hope 
in his mercy. 

I have no Christian with whom to hold sweet 
communion, but God condescendingly draws 
nigh. For five Sabbaths I have been deprived of 
the ordinances of his house, but the thoughts 
of them are precious unto me to-day. I can eat 
of no emblems of my Saviour's body, nor drink of 
his blood typified, but I can say that my love of 
him is sweet, and passeth knowledge. 

Harbor of Rio Janeiro, Ship Canada. 

Sabbath, Nov. 22. I arrived here safely on 
Friday the nineteenth. Twice we were in con- 
siderable danger, and feared serious conse- 
quences. Truly He who holds the sea in the 
hollow of his hand is God and not man, else we 



RIO JANEIRO. 157 

must have been left to perish. Oft have I won- 
dered that we were permitted to ride upon the 
bosom of an element belonging to and perform- 
ing the will of the great Jehovah, when from our 
decks went up so much cursing and bitterness. 

The city lies out before me, in appearance 
beautiful and comely. From two to three hun- 
dred thousand souls find shelter there ; but, 
alas, how few, probably, know their right hand 
from their left, in a spiritual sense ! The rug- 
ged peaks and rocky summits seem to hang over 
them, in the distance, and methinks in the judg- 
ment many of these people may be heard calling 
on these stupendous works of nature to fall on 
them and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. 
It was in contemplation, and I believe decided 
on, when I left New York, that the Seaman's 
Friend Society would send a chaplain here to 
preach to American seamen, and my heart, filled 
with pity for them, rejoices in the prospect. I 
shall not, can not, leave the port without leaving 
my prayer for his speedy arrival and great suc- 
cess. In God's sti'ength he will prevail over the 
host of iniquity which he will have to encounter. 

In a letter addressed to one of his brothers in 
New Haven, we find a more particular account 
of this voyage, giving a vivid description of some 
of the trials of sea voyagers. It may be of inter- 
est to some of our readers. 



158^ THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Voyag-e to Rio Janeiro. — Letter to Ms Brother in Boston. — Sickness, 
and Depression of Spirits. — Visit to Burial Place. — Death of a 
Young Countryman. — Awful Death of Eighty-four Patagonians. 
— Death of a Young Man. — Case of Elderly Countryman. 

Letter to Mr. and Mrs. E. W. B., N. H.: — 

At Sea, Coast of Brazil, (Ship Canada, from 

Rio Janeiro to Monte Video,) Nov. 25, 1835. 

Dear Brother and Sister: I was unable, 
for want of time, to write you from Rio de Ja- 
neiro, as I intended. I now propose to give you 
some account of my voyage, as my present situ- 
ation affords me leisure which I can not expect 
after my arrival in the River la Plata. I wrote 
you from New York that I had taken passage in 

the J A . We lay at anchor off Sandy 

Hook one night, and went to sea on the morning 
of the 5th of October. I little thought when 
making the little vessel for Henry, that I was to 
embark in a craft of nearly the same rig — almost 
as fragile — and when placed alongside of the 
big waves, in appearance as small. But so it 
was. Our brig was a mere shingle. She danced 
upon the ripples in the dock, and a " cat's-paw" 



STORM — MEETING. 159 

of wind was sufRcient in East River to make her 
tremble. We went out with the wind southerly, 
and before nightfall it proved a strong gale from 
S. S. E. Other vessels that came to sea with us 
hastened back. Our little bark alone kept on. 
The gale increased, and at 10 o'clock in the 
evening, we expected nothing better than a ship- 
wreck on Long Island before morning, th« sea, 
the current, and the wind, all setting us rapidly 
toward the shore. It was too dark to distinguish 
pale faces from courageous ones, and each had 
to muster his own fortitude to keep from despond- 
ency. There is more thought of than said on 
such occasions, and as every one knew the dan- 
ger, there was no need of communicating on 
the subject. Our only chance of escape was in 
crowding all sail. This was done. But our 
masts and spars bent and creaked as if they were 
doing their last service. I believe I suffered 
least from anxiety of any one on board. I had 
lost all my strength by severe sea sickness. I 
had vomited up all my fears, and as I lay listening 
to the roaring of the waves and the whistling of 
the winds, suddenly, about midnight, I heard a 
heavy scuffling on deck, and presently the cry 
of "Mutiny! murder! murder!" mixed Avith 
horrid oaths and imprecations. The mate came 
running down into the cabin, too much out of 
breath to speak, seized a pair of pistols, and 



160 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

sprang again on deck. I followed at his heels, 
to see what the matter was. The gale, the lee 
shore, the leaky ship, and the watery grave 
were all secondary affairs for a few minutes, as a 
nearer danger seemed to threaten. I found, on 
going up, the helm deserted, and the crew all 
fighting. The darkness making it impossible for 
them to distinguish each other, each was beating 
the one nearest him, regardless of friend or foe, 
each crying for assistance, and all cursing bit- 
terly. I could not divine the cause, nor see that 
I could effect any thing by engaging in the con- 
test. The sails were all aback, and I began to 
fear that we might go down stern foremost be- 
fore the battle was decided. I seized the helm, 
and finally succeeded in getting the vessel round. 
The mate had aimed his pistol at the heart of 
one he supposed was a mutineer. It was, how- 
ever, the captain, who at the same instant cried 
out, "For God's sake don't shoot we." This 
recognition and narrow escape brought these 
two to their senses, and, joining forces, they 
soon conquered the crew. Seizing one of the 
strongest, they brought him on the quarter deck, 
threw him down, and while he cried murder 
most lustily, they gave him a severe flogging 
with a rope's end. When I thought they had 
given him enough I began to beg for him, and 
they desisted. It appeared on examination, that 



PERILOUS VOYAGE. 161 

the crew had been drinking whiskey, and were 
unruly and disobedient. Harry, the Dutchman, 
who had undergone such a flagellation, carried a 
black eye and many bruises for a time ; but all 
the crew, for the remainder of the voyage, were 
orderly and obedient. 

We succeeded in getting the brig well to sea, 
she having suffered a severe straining, and leak- 
ing not a little in consequence of the gale. We 
now proceeded on our voyage with favorable 
winds, and nothing unpleasant occurred until 
we had reached the latitude of 10° north. Here 
every thing seemed to go against us. The favor- 
able gales we had enjoyed entirely left us ; calms, 
violent squalls, thunder, lightning, and showers 
succeeded. The main stay parted, the bowsprit 
shrouds gave way, the sails and rigging chafed 
as if nothing would remain long to help us per- 
form our voyage. Our seamen, who had not had a 
shred of dry clothing since leaving port, so much 
had we been under water, began to get worn out 
and sick. One, partly owing to privations on 
a preceding voyage, broke out with large boils 
and other appearances of scurvy. For several 
days this poor Lazarus, as the captain called him, 
could hardly move. The mate began to enter- 
tain fearful forebodings that we might be carried 
to the westward by the currents, or that we 
should fall to leeward of Cape St. Roque, and 
11 



162 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

thus greatly prolong our voyage. The captain 
said he was not superstitious at all, but that 
something was certainly wrong, some Jonah was 
certainly aboard of his vessel. This he seriously 
asserted frequently and often before me, and, al- 
though we had lived together hitherto in perfect 
harmony, I began to see that he was certainly 
suspicious of me. The bad weather continued, 
the rain came down in torrents, the black squalls 
rose one after another, in fact, the elements 
seemed leagued against us. We made no prog- 
ress ; and the e\il dispositions of all were 
roused and irritated by what they called their 
hard fate. 

I came on board the brig, it is true, in Jonah 
style — that is, in haste ; was personally unknown 
to all, and this caused their suspicions to be 
fixed on me. I laughed at them, and sometimes 
they would laugh ; but with all this, and their 
repeated declarations that they were not super- 
stitious, it was plain to see that no seamen were 
ever more so. They believed me to be religious, 
and that was sufficient in their eyes to condemn 
me. It is not unfrequently, I am told, the case, 
where ships carry missionaries, that all misfor- 
tunes happening while they are on board are 
attributed by the sailors to their account. The 
mate said that before he left New. York he had had 
bad dreams, and, in fact, that he had never been 



SUPERSTITIONS — OFF RIO. 163 

SO loth to come to sea in his life ; he could not 
account for it ! Poor fellow, he had forgotten 
that he had previously told me that he was 
married the week before he left. The captain 
also had direful dreams of shipwreck and fam- 
ine. Each cursed the sea and the day he em- 
barked upon it. You can not imagine a more 
unhappy condition than we were in. I did not 
suffer myself to repine, but waited patiently, 
feeling that relief would come. At last it was 
observed that when Jack, an English boy, came 
to take the helm in his turn, the wind was sure 
to haul two or tliree points ahead. The captain 
thereupon fixed upon him as the Jonah, and 
scolded him, and threatened to sacrifice him to 
the sharks ! 

Eight or ten days at last put an end to 
their superstitions. We arrived off Rio on 
Thursday, 19th. During the evening it was 
calm, and we drifted in among the rocky islands 
which lie ofif the mouth of the harbor. Con- 
sidering our situation rather critical, I sat up to 
see what might happen. About midnight we 
found ourselves close to a rocky precipice three 
or four hundred feet high, and approaching 
quite fast. The sea was roaring against it like 
thunder, and our destruction seemed inevitable. 
I can not describe my feelings at the moment. 
The rocks seemed to have a magnetic power 



* 

164 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

over us. The vessel would not obey the helm. 
She would keep her head toward the danger, as 
if determined to rush on it. All hands were 
called, the boat was launched, we got out oars, 
we rowed and pulled to tow her off. I exerted 
myself until the perspiration ran off in streams, 
and I could hardly breathe. For four hours 
we continued to pull and haul without moving 
the vessel. The only consolation we had was, 
that we kept her from approaching the break- 
ers. This was all our utmost efforts could do. 

I never looked for the day to dawn with so 
much anxiety. Our horror was increased, how- 
ever, when it did come, for as the east lighted 
up, the perils of our situation became more vis- 
ible. We were nearer than we had supposed. 
We redoubled our efforts, cheered the men, and 
still we moved not ; but, to our great joy, when 
the sun arose, a little breeze sprang up to our 
relief, and with the help of this, with our oars 
and the blessing of God, we succeeded in get- 
ting out of the jaws of death. We entered 
Rio Janeiro the same day, after forty-six days' 
passage from Sandy Hook. In weighing anchor 
to go up into the inner harbor, we got foul of 
a Guineaman — a little schooner — which had 
landed her slaves on the coast, and came in in 
ballast. This made a deal of confusion. We 
lost an anchor and cable before we could get 



ARRIVAL AT RIO JANEIRO. 165 

extricated. The captain and mate differed in 
regard to what should be done, and actually 
fell to fighting, so that much time was lost. I 
begged them to desist, and settle their quarrel 
another time. The little vessel was much de- 
cayed, and we were scraping her sides like a 
soft nutmeg, and I feared we might ride her 
down. We finally got clear by slipping our 
cable, and succeeded in coming to our anchor- 
age and getting on shore before night. 

Thus ended our voyage. But you can not 
imagine how comfortable a hotel looks after 
such a voyage at sea of six or seven weeks, with- 
out retirement, without attendants, without the 
comforts and conveniences of civilized life. 
My room seemed a sanctuary, the servants, who 
looked for and anticipated my wants, seemed, 
ministering spirits, althougli in Brazil, as every 
one knows, they are as black as demons. The 
large, tidy, and well-furnished parlor looked 
paradisaical, and the sofas and couches seemed 
resting places for angels. My bed, so nice and 
clean, presented such a contrast to the one I had 
on board ! 

I found a few very hospitable friends in 
Rio Janeiro the next day. I had but one let- 
ter ; but got an introduction to most of the 
American merchants, and they all offered their 
services, and showed me particular regard. The 



166 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

ship, on board of which I am, and from which 
1 write you, being about to sail for Monte Yideo, 
my friends kindly assisted me, that I might 
avail myself of this fine opportunity to proceed 
on my journey. One sent his custom house 
clerk to go through the necessary forms and 
ceremonies at the " Alfandega," in order to 
tranship my baggage ; another interested him- 
self to get me out a passport in one day, with- 
out which I could not leave the country, and 
which, according to all the forms of law, it 
would take about three days to obtain. This 
he succeeded in doing by some managing in 
about twelve hours. His influence exceeded 
that of most Americans at Rio. 

Let me give you a true translation of this 
most important document, which cost me eigh- 
teen milreas, or about fourteen Spanish dollars, 
and which is of no further service than just to 
pass me out of the harbor, as it will never again 
be called for. It is a great imposition, and for 
terms exceeds the bombast of the Emperor of 
China. 

[Arms of Brazil.] I, Manuel Alves Branco, of the Coun- 
cil of His Majesty the Emperor, Minister and Secretary of 
Foreign Affairs, &c., make known to all wherever this pass- 
port may come, that George W. Blake, a citizen of the 
United States, goes from the city and court of Rio de Janeiro 
to Buenos Ayres. The regent, in the name of the Emperor, 
commands that no impediment whatever shall be put in the 



A BRAZILIAN PASSPORT. 167 

way of the abovesaid citizen of the United States leaving the 
port freely ; and to the commanders of armies and of cities, 
to captains and officers of militia, to ministers and officers of 
justice, of war, and of the customs, as well as to admirals of 
navies, chiefs of squadrons, captains of sea and of war, and 
commanders of all blockades whatsoever, to kings, princes, 
republics, principalities, potentates, friends of the Imperial 
crown of Brazil, whether met with at sea or in passing 
through their dominions, that they do nothing to the hinder- 
ance of his voyage or journey, but rather that they assist him 
and supply him with whatever he may require. In this cer- 
tifying that those who may bring similar recommendations 
from their sovereigns shall be equally favored by the subjects 
of his Imperial Majesty. In virtue of which I have issued 
this present passport, signed by me, and stamped with the 
imperial arms. 

Given at the Palace of Rio de Janeiro, November 21, in 
the year of our Lord 1835, and the 1-ith of the Independence 
of the Empire. 

(Signed) Maxuel A. Braxco. 

By order of his Excellency. 

Vicente Axtoxio de Costa. 

[Registered page — , 4th Book of Passports.] 

Office Secretary of State, 

^'ov. 21, 1835. V. A. DE Costa. 

One might think from the above that it would 
be essentially necessary for every foreign trav- 
eler to have a passport from the government of 
Brazil if he did not know that it was one of the 
weakest governments in the world, and that the 
reciprocations they promise to all who respect 
their passports, when they come to Brazil, are 
nothing else but extortions and oppressions. I 



168 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

came on board this fine, large ship, (formerly 
one of the London packets from New York,) 
late in the evening of the 21st, and sailed from 
Rio on Monday, November 23. I have very 
good accommodations and ample conveniences 
for writing. To this and my leisure you are 
indebted for the trouble of reading so long a 
letter. Please tell the boys, who expressed such 
a desire to come with me, that the courage they 
manifested would have deserted them before 
some of the dangers of the deep. The sun was 
so hot at the equator that the skin would have 
peeled from their faces — a common occurrence 
with " green hands." I could not but think how 
much better off they were at home, and I ad- 
vise - them never to go to sea, or to trust them- 
selves on salt water without a good reason. 

The next letter is to his brother, J. W. B., in 
Boston, dated January 20, 1836. 

" I arrived here early in the month of Decem- 
ber from Bio Janeiro, since which I have been 
into the interior as far as Cordova, from whence 
I returned on the loth of this month. My 
journey has thrown me into a fever, from which, 
my physician says, I am recovering. 1 am too 
sick, however, to write you myself, and am 
obliged to employ an amanuensis." 

On his return to Buenos Ayres he seems to 



A COMMUNION SABBATH. 169 . 

have found the little flock, with whom he had 
formerly worshiped, scattered.* He was also 
disappointed in regard to his prospects for busi- 
ness. • These things, added, to his confinement 
by sickness, all tended to depress his spirits, as * 
appears from his journal at this time, from which 
we make some extracts. 

Buenos Ayres, Sabbath, April 10, 1836. 

It was permitted me last Sabbath to partake 
of the emblems of my dying Saviour's body and 
blood, at the English church, and in the Epis- 
copal form. Kneeling to receive the elements 
seemed to make the ceremony solemn and im- 
posing. Going to the altar was new to me, and, 
as I bowed and waited my turn, I was enabled, 
I trHst in sincerity, to give up myself anew to 
God, and I made many good resolutions. Oh, 
when shall I begin to live wholly for Christ ! 
I will awake. God, my heart is fixed ! but 
I am weak. In thy strength alone I trust to 
overcome sin. 

I have to acknowledge the goodness of God 
in preserving my life through many dangers 
while making a journey into the interior, and 



* The missionary from the United States, (an agent of the Amer- 
ican Bible Society,) who had maintained public worship principally 
during Mr. B.'s previous residence there, had returned to his native 
country. 



170 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

in raising me up from a bed of sickness since 
my return. I was brought nigh unto death, and 
for many days lay weak and helpless, uncertain 
of the Lord's will concerning me. Thou hast 
chastised me sorely, but justly ; and now I pray 
for grace to improve all thy dealings toward 
me. I have intercourse with few Christians. 
The destitution of the gospel among this people 
shows its value. The effects of this destitution 
are apparent. To those who have felt its power, 
the regular preaching of the gospel is, indeed, 
above all price. The companionship of fellow- 
travelers to Zion is here a luxury unknown in 
more favored lands. Here heart meets heart, 
" face answereth to face," and there is unison, 
concord, love. 

Letter to his father : — 

Buenos Atres, May 30, 1836. 

My Dear Father : I ought to apologize for 
having delayed writing you so long. I am sorry 
to say I have been prevented by many things. 
I have been disappointed in hearing from our 
family but once since I left the United States ; 
and now I would remind you that you have a 
son at seven thousand miles distance ; but this 
does not make him forget his father, or the 
endearments of his native country. The sun is 



FILIAL AFFECTION. 171 

now returning to revive your hemisphere, while 
it is deserting this in which I live. While at 
the north nature awakes to life, it is left at the 
south to perish. Our winter is just setting in. 
A frost last night set us all shaking with cold. 
The fire is becoming a desideratum. The cold, 
bleak winds of June and July, from the icy re- 
gions of the south, begin to brace us. I would 
fain be with you again, not only to enjoy the 
genial rays of your summer's sun, and escape 
the cold winter, but especially to refresh my 
memory by another view of those endearing 
scenes which made my youth happy, and to see 
again the face of him from whom I derived my 
existence, who watched over my infancy, instill- 
ing the love of virtue and religion, that I might 
carry that happiness into later years. 

" God bless my father," is my frequent prayer ; 
and although my residence abroad should be of 
long conthmance, you will never be forgotten. 
I hope I shall return again in the course of one 
or two years. . 

Journal. • 

BuExos Ayres, Saturday Evening, June 25, 1836. 

With two friends belonging to the American 
navy, friends whom I love because they love 
God, I have this day taken a walk out of town. 
Among other places we visited the burying-place 



172 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

of the " Recolata." In this region of the dead 
we spent a considerable time among the tombs 
and monuments with which that place abounds. 
How humiliating was the spectacle of human 
bones, decayed coffins, and grave clothes, which 
in some places strewed the ground. The earth 
on which we trod (our common mother) seemed 
to have feasted on the bodies of her children, and 
left these sad remnants of her feast. I looked 
into the charnel house. It was a tremendous 
open pit, a reservoir of bones and skulls. Deep 
into the earth they dug it, but left the top un- 
covered, and ever exposed to the sight of the 
living. I thought of the resurrection as I leaned 
over the wall and surveyed the ghastly scene ! 
Yf hen the trumpet sounds and these dry bones 
awake to life, what a scene will be here ! This 
corruption shall put on incorruption, and this 
mortal immortality. Then, like a host arising, 
death shall verily be swallowed up in victory I 

Sabbath Evening, July 3. 

Some painful incidents have occurred the past 
week. In the early part of it an unfortunate 
acquaintance and countryman, who is residing 
in this land of strangers, was taken sick. He is 
the son of pious parents, and one year's residence 
has been sufficient to make him set at naught all 
the kind injunctions of his father, and all prin- 



DEATH BED OF A PRODIGAL. 173 

ciples of religion. I had made some ineffectual 
attempts to bring him back, and to secure his 
attendance at church ; and it was not without 
the most distressing interest that I heard that he 
was near his end. He was partially insane from 
the disease. On Wednesday night I watched 
with him, expecting every hour would be his 
last. On Thursday night, at eleven o'clock, the 
physicians declared him to be dying ; and then 
it was proposed that a minister should be sent 
for to pray with him. The eleventh hour had 
arrived, and what had been the subject of his 
derision it was now thought best to bring to his 
aid ! The man of God came at midnight. The 
sufferer was told of his state, and advised to im- 
prove the moment. His mind returned to con- 
template the horrors of his situation, but his 
parched tongue could hardly utter a word. 
Prayers were said, as eight or ten of his country- 
men knelt by his bedside. Convulsions came 
on, struggles and hiccough ; the pulse ceased, 
and he was placed in a position to die ! Strange 
to say, he revived, and still lives, but only lives 
to suffer excruciating pain. Death lingers, but 
there is no hope of his recovery. How dreadful 
is the situation of this young stranger, with no 
relative near ; he having trifled away the day of 
grace, forsaken the counsels of his father, and 
despised those of his God, having no hope, and 



174 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

apparently drawing near to death ! Some of his 
companions in guilt refuse to see him in this 
state, so awful, and have forsaken him. This is 
the friendship of the world ! This is worldly 
trust, and this the end of worldly pleasure ! 
I have to-day listened to an excellent sermon 

by Rev. Mr. S , chaplain in the United States 

navy. It is encouraging to see a Christian in 
such a land as this, but to meet the face of a 
Christian minister, and to hear the preached 
word from his lips, is blessed and soul reviving. 
When unexpectedly the waters waft one to these 
shores, it is like finding a prize of great value. 

July 7. 
My sick countryman died on the fifth. After 
the convulsions of Thursday night he did not ap- 
pear again to have his reason ; sometimes calling 
fo? his father, mother, sisters, &c. Thus early 
has he been cut off. May I be admonished ! 

Saturday Evening, July 23, 1836. 

It has been my lot the past week to witness a 
horrible scene of carnage. On Wednesday I 
was present at the landing of eighty-four Patago- 
nian Indians, who had been brought as prisoners 
from the south in irons, by a vessel that had 
just arrived. Several captives, who had been 
retaken from the Indians, came in the same 



MURDER OP PATAGONIANS. 175 

vessel. The men were taken to prison, and on 
Thursday morning were all taken out and shot ! 
Yes, eighty-four large, stout men, within twenty- 
four hours of landing, were all executed in this 
city, few persons knowing that the execution was 
to take place until the firing commenced. I saw 
their bodies stripped and laid side by side, in one 
large, long grave. This was dug in one of the 
most filthy places near the city, and these sixteen 
cart loads of human flesh and bones, dripping with 
blood, were driven througli the city, and tipped 
up beside the grave. These bodies, deprived of 
every particle of clotliing, were then placed in two 
rows, feet to feet, faces up, the long, black hair 
of the copper-colored race hanging disheveled 
over their broken heads and ghastly counte- 
nances. See the stout, well-formed bodies, sin- 
ewy limbs, projecting chest, such as nature has 
given this simple race ! Thus they lie, in a grave 
about four feet deep, ready for covering. These 
men had no trial. Their guilt consisted in 
pursuing their profession of warfare, and in 
attempting to escape after being captured. They 
knew not their doom until led to execution. 
They knew not the language of the people, and 
probably were ignorant of the cause of their 
violent death. O God, let me not be hardened 
by such scenes, nor let me any more behold 
them I There have been, it is said, two or three 



176 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

hundred who have shared the same fate within 
a few months in the interior of the country. 

Letter to his brother : — 

July 13. 

On all speculative subjects I conceive it well 
to suspend one's judgment, or at least to express 
no opinion to the detriment of others. To illus- 
trate my idea, I will relate a circumstance which 
took place a few days since. I was in an observa- 
tory, looking out for approaching vessels. One, 
at last, hove in sight, as far distant as the eye 
could reach. As her white sails, and finally her 
hull rose out of the water, one of several gentle- 
men affirmed that he knew her character ; that 
he saw her flag, that she was a Frenchman, he 
saw the three colors distinctly. Another, think- 
ing, perhaps, he was bound to know as much, 
declared her to be a Brazilian ; that he could 
discover the diamond and the crown. Another 
knowingly averred that she was of Hamburg; 
that the castle on the red ground was plain to 
be seen. You are wrong, said another ; it is an 
Englishman ; I can see St. George's Cross. I 
looked, and to my surprise, could see no flag at 
all. Presently, a very respectable, old, gray- 
headed pilot took a peep ; and all, as if anxious 
now to have their own individual opinion con- 
firmed, eagerly inquired what he thought. JSe 



LANGUAGES — STREET OF PEACE. 177 

looked some time, and then said, " Gentlemen, 
I do not know what she is. It will be time 
enough to conclude when she hoists her flag, and 
we can all see it alike." I must say I thought 
him the wisest man of the company. As it 
proved, the vessel was an American, with her 
stars and stripes. 

I am glad to hear that you are giving atten- 
tion to the French language. It will be an 
advantage to you, particularly if you go abroad. 
I think, for this side the Atlantic, the Castil- 
ian is preferable, and for the other, the French. 
I know enough of both, with the Portuguese, to 
read the newspapers, and can converse con- 
siderably in the Spanish. It is a very elegant 
and noble language, and in this respect throws 
the French quite into the sliade. 

My dear brother, I commend you to God, 
knowing that he will not fail to bless you, if you 
serve him. I thank you for your prayers. I 
fail not to keep regularly our family concert ; 
and be assured you are never forgotten by your 
affectionate brother, G. W. Blake. 

In his journal he writes : — 

July — . 

On the 19th I changed my lodgings, but still 
live in the " Calle de la Paz," (the Street of 
Peace.) God grant I may here find that peace 
12 



178 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

wliich the world can not give. Within a few 
days a war has broken out in the Republic of 
the Banda Oriental, on the other side of the 
river. Fears are entertained that this govern- 
ment will be involved, and then we are likely to 
have trouble again. What a world is this made 
by the depravity of men. When shall Satan's 
kingdom be destroyed, and the peaceful kingdom 
of Christ be established ? With more unabated 
fervor I resolve to pray, "Thy kingdom come." 

Aug. 21. 

Death seems to surround me on every side. 
Within a few weeks several have fallen victims 
to the fell destroyer in the square in which I 
live. Alas, how frail is man ! I see one and 
another cut down in a moment, some entirely 
unprepared. Not long since I saw one on his 
death bed whom I had made some efforts to 
persuade to attend on the means of grace. He 
had rejected my invitations, and laughed at my 
earnestness, although he professed to believe that 
I had the kindest motives. But his love of 
pleasure weighed down every other consideration. 
He would not think, but hasted into every kind 
of dissipation, and made even 

<' Loved life unlovely, hugging her to death." 

He soon ended his race. Disease, brought on 
by irregularities, in four days from the time he 



DEATH IN PROFLIGACY. 179 

was taken sick, deprived him of his reason, his 
speech, and, in a great measure, of his sensi- 
bility. As I saw him lie gasping for breath, 
I mourned that I had not more earnestly 
warned him of the danger of deferring repent- 
ance. Death soon closed the scene. His com- 
panions in guilt endeavor to draw a veil over his 
sinful practices, and to conceal from his friends, 
who were not present to witness them, the causes 
of his speedy dissolution. " Those who write to 
his relatives," said one, " should be careful not 
to say too much." " It will be enough," said 
another, "merely to state his decease, and that 
he was properly attended by nurses and physi- 
cians.'' 

Need I say that these were the friends who 
led him to the brothel and the gaming table, 
and who had "deprived him of his money ? I 
heard that he had a pious father. I saw it 
written in a beautiful Bible, that was among his 
effects, " The gift of an affectionate mother to 
her son," with many tender and touching lines 
to remind him in a foreign land of her affection, 
and her frequent prayers for his eternal good. 
Tears sprang from my eyes as I read these ad- 
monitions of a pious mother to her son, now no 
more. 

I did not know her, but I did know him ; and, 
judging of a parent's anxiety to hear some ac- 



180 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

count of a dying son away from home, I sat 
down to write some particulars. I thought 
again ; I hesitated ; I could say so little in his 
favor that I gave up the idea ; and it is not 
probable that any one will ever describe " faith- 
fully to his parents the dying scene." 

Sabbath Evening, Aug. 28. 

I have been conversing with a pious friend on 
the necessity of preserving a clear distinction 
between believers and unbelievers. I urged 
that it was scriptural to wish for wider differ- 
ence than exists among the two classes gener- 
ally at the present day ; and that if it was clear 
where the division lay, we might not only ex- 
pect Christians to be more holy and useful, but 
that more of the ungodly would be converted 
and saved. 

It is melancholy to see how many professors 
of religion there are at the present day who 
like to belong to either side as suits their con- 
venience. No one who has not seen such pro- 
fessors at home and abroad can calculate the 
number. Like some of the kings of Israel, who 
did that which was right in the sight of the 
Lord, and yet suffered the high places to stand, 
and, to suit the whims of an idolatrous people, 
would occasionally sacrifice a son, or make him 
pass through the fire to Moloch, so do some of 



AN AGED SWEARER. 181 

our modern Christians. They like to mix mat- 
ters ; but, like the reigns of those kings whom 
they resemble, their lives will pass without ef- 
fecting any thing of that work which was then, 
and is now, to be accomplished by more decided, 
self-denying, and holy laborers. 

Tuesday Evexixg, Sept. 13. 

I have visited this evening, among others, a 
gray-headed countryman, who has reached al- 
most his three score and ten. He is now, 
strange to say, and has been for many years, one 
of the worst of profane swearers. I have cul- 
tivated an acquaintance with him only with a 
view to do him good. He has naturally a kind 
heart, is honest, beloved in his family, has 
reared his children to be temperate and indus- 
trious like himself, never goes to the theater, 
(nor, indeed, to church !) and is addicted to no 
vices, other than swearing and the love of gain. 
I first knew him four years ago in another and 
foreign country, but never became sufficiently 
acquainted with him, until within three or four 
months, to be able, in a kind and friendly man- 
ner, to reason with him on the sin of profane- 
ness. He confessed to me his desire to leave it 
off at the first ; and I have noticed with pleas- 
ure that he has of late been making efforts to 
break himself of it, and I have hope of his sue- 



182 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN BIERCHANT. 

ceeding. With regard to religion, he has told 
me that he wants to be a Christian, but that he 
is so old he thinks it is too late, and, finding it 
hard at his time of life to apply himself seri- 
ously to obtain eternal life, he is disposed to 
trust to what good he has done in his family, 
&c., and with this to throw himself into the 
hands of his Maker. He is, in some respects, 
more moral and upright than many of our pro- 
fessing Christians, and often reproaches them for 
inconsistencies and sins of which he would not be 
guilty. He is a most faithful follower of Mam- 
mon. How I long that he might seek for the 
true riches as he thirsts for the unsatisfying, cor- 
rupting, and perishing treasures of this world ! 
He seems to allow weight to the arguments I 
use to persuade him to embrace the gospel. My 
heart is drawn out toward him, and I earnestly 
wish for the salvation of his soul, according to 
my usual custom after speaking with any one 
on the subject of religion. I have commended 
him to God in prayer again and again. He 
seems to desire my company, although I do not 
let any good opportunity pass to remind him of, 
and reprove him for, his sins. I endeavor to do 
it kindly and respectfully, and, notwithstanding 
the difference in our ages, and the great differ- 
ence in our opinions, I find much reward in the 
kind and good-tempered way in which he listens 
to me. 



LIFE OF BRAINERD. 183 

Sabbath, Sept. 15. 

I have been reading the Life of Brainerd. 
He was eminently a holy man, a Christian who 
exemplified his faith by his works, showing also, 
in his experience, that a happy death will follow 
a faithful life. I feel my soul refreshed by this 
perusal, and pray God to make it a blessing to 
me. 



184 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER XIL 



Conversation with Companions. — A Holy Life necessary to Useful- 
ness. — Card Playing. — New Consecration. — Severe Sickness. — 
State of the Country. — Views and Feelings under Reverses. — 
Anxiety for a Friend. 



Buenos Ayres, Sabbath Evening, Oct. 2. 

Journal. — Providence has opened the way for 
me to speak to two of my companions, who have 
long lived seeking the pleasures of sin. I was en- 
abled, as I trust, through the favor of God, to make 
religion appear to them comely, and preferable 
to their unholy and unsubstantial systems of 
morals. They admitted the truth of all I said. 
I urged the shortness of time, the uncertainty 
of life, and the certainty of death and judgment, 
as inducements to improve the present moment. 
I had a private interview with each. One said, 
" As soon as I get home to my family I will 
attend to religion." The other said, " You 
seem enthusiastic ; and I confess your enthu- 
siasm is worth having ; but I know not how to 
get it." He did not believe in the efficacy of 
prayer. I advised him to make trial of it, con- 
fessing his ignorance, and asking for light ; and 



CHRISTIAN DECISION. 185 

I assured him that the promises would not fail. 
" Well," said he, " when I have time I will try 
this method. "'•' I thereupon almost despaired of 
him; for there is not a man in the city who has 
more leisure than he ; and yet, Felix-like, he 
wants a more convenient season. Alas, how 
plainly is the heart of man alienated from God 
and from divine things ! 

I have sometimes feared to be very forward to 
warn and exhort others, lest I should tliereby, in 
case of falling, become a greater instrument of 
dishonor to the cause of Christ, or by my in- 
consistencies become a stumbling block to 
others. I have, however, determined to do my 
duty, trusting in God to keep me from dishon- 
oring his cause. The more public the stand I 
take the more I feel committed, and the more 
I see the necessity of a holy life and conversa- 
tion. I think many Christians would backslide 
less if they were more fully committed ; and I 
know that the convenient position many take, 
equidistant between heaven and the world, is no 
favorable situation for doing good, nor for the 
enjoyment of inward peace. 

Dec. 1. 

I called this morning upon one or two gentle- 
men, who came to church, and sat in my pew, 
last Sabbath. One I found entertaining some 



186 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

company. " Now you've come," said one, pat- 
ting me over the shoulders, " we'll take a game 
at whist. You play, of course ? " " No, sir, I 
dp not ; " and I recollected that he had come to 
me only a few days previous, stating that he was 
too conscientious to play at cards. But he now 
had an object to accomplish in his business. 
The cards were produced. " Mr. B., you luill 
join us," said the host. " No, sir ; I do not play 
at cards." " Sit down, nowj'' said another ; 
"just enough with you to make a party." This 
last was one with whom I had been long ac- 
quainted, and who professed at one time to have 
felt the power of that Spirit whom he had often 
since grieved. In answering him, I answered 
the whole, and said, " Why, gentlemen, I am a 
religious man. Don't you know that I can not 
approve of card playing ? " " So am I a reli- 
gious man," said one and another ; " but there 
is no harm in a game of cards." I soon bade 
them good night, while they returned me the 
same words, with a manner implying that they 
were glad to get rid of a troublesome guest ; 
and yet I know that each one had the inward 
monitor still remaining to trouble him. 

In his present sojourn in Buenos Ayres Mr. 
B. had no congenial Christian friends with 
whom he could maintain familiar intercourse, 



RESOLUTIONS FOR THE NEW YEAR. 187 

and meet for prayer. The next entry in his 
journal shows that he felt this privation. 

Buenos Ayres, Sabbath Evening, Dec. 11. 

A prayer meeting is held in town every Sab- 
bath evening ; but it is so boisterous and noisy, 
that I can not attend with any comfort or pleas- 
ure. I am, therefore, considered by those of 
my fellow-Christians, who go to these meetings, 
as indifferent to religion, a worldling, and a 
heretic. I, nevertheless, love them, and wish 
them God-speed. My heart is witli them ; but, 
unfortunately, I can not sympathize with their 
manner of worship. The grave, no doubt, will 
bury all these differences. In heaven every 
member of our Lord's triumphant church will 
be able to sing in unison the same song. 

Buenos Ayres, Sabbath, Jan. 1, 1837. 

How interesting is this day, beginning the 
week, the month, the year ! I have anew ded- 
icated myself to God, and made earnest resolu- 
tions for the new year ; but I know not what a 
day may bring forth. I pray that in the uncer- 
tainty of life I may be led to defer nothing 
which is my present duty. Tlie year dawns on 
vme in a foreign land ; but the narrow way is 
letill before me. 

I think I can see the celestial gate, and 



188 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

that it is my true desire to arrive there, al- 
though it may be through a strange land, and 
through many imperfections and privations, and 
that I may enjoy and glorify more perfectly my 
blessed Saviour. 

Lord Jesus receive me in thine own time, 
wholly indebted to grace, to live and reign with 
thee. Amen. 

** Lord, I come to thee for rest, 
Take possession of my breast ; 
There thy sovereign right maintain, 
And without a rival reign." 

Letter to his youngest brother, then in the 
Theological Seminary at Pittsburg, Pa. 

March 12. 

I thank you for your remarks with regard 
to the meeting of the General Assembly. You 
hint that it may be uninteresting to me ; but, my 
dear brother, such things are full of interest to 
me. A great subject of regret with me is, that 
I have so few correspondents who will give me 
information of this kind. I fear there is a gen- 
eral impression among those who write me from 
home that, during my absence, I am taking no 
interest in the great moral and religious ques- 
tions and benevolent enterprises of the church 
in my native land. I assure you I read every 
thing I can lay hold of which throws any light 



INTEREST IN RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE. 189 

upon the momentous changes that are taking 
place in religious matters both in Europe and 
America. I believe it impossible for any Chris- 
tian to look with indifference upon the prospects 
of religion in Great Britain without the most 
lively concern. 

In the United States I am, of course, more 
interested. You must not conclude, because 
it is my business to buy and sell, that I devote, 
like too many of our American merchants and 
traders, all my faculties to sordid purposes. I 
go upon the principle that there is a time for 
all things ; and when I can not pursue my pro- 
fession without sacrificing my soul, I'll advertise 
myself, To let — an unexpired lease of a miser- 
able existence. 

You will observe that though I have left the 
street of " Piety," I have moved up the street 
of " Peace." Are not these grand names for 
avenues ? One might conclude this to be a 
very religious people. Alas ! the names are 
here, indeed, but for the substance ! You 
might as well look for 

" Blooming roses on the cheek of death, 
Substance in a world of fleeting shades." 

As for myself, would to God that I brought 
forth more of the fruits of piety and peace. 
You speak of temptations, and of being encour- 



190 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHA.NT. 

aged by my example. I bless God if he has, 
in this respect, made me in any wise a help to 
you. I can boast of nothing but the grace of 
God ; and he alone has upheld me when my 
feet were slipping, and I had well nigh fallen. 
My warfare is hard ; but, knowing who is the 
Captain of my salvation, and who will finally 
become victorious, I am strengthened day by 
day ^fearing', that I may be watchful and prayer- 
ful, indulging in no carnal security^ lest I may 
be forsaken. 

Journal. 

Sabbath Evening, March 19. 

The cares of business have almost over- 
whelmed me. One Christian brother has de- 
serted me, owing to our differing on a subject 
of charity. I have made efforts to explain, 
have even put myself in the wrong, and . asked 
his forgiveness, but he still keeps aloof. May 
God forgive us both, and unite us in a future 
world, as I trust we both love him, and ardently 
desire to obey him. 

Letter to his twin brother. 

April 23. 

My Beloved Brother : I have occasionally, 
through others, heard of your joys and your 
sorrows, and have, unknown to you, given you 



SICKNESS. 191 

my most lively sympatliies. I have seen you in 
imagination when your bosom beat with pleas- 
ure at the birth of an heir ; I have seen you 
mourning at its loss ; but in all these scenes you 
appeared as a Christian. Was it indeed so ? 
Did you lean on God, and did he support you ? 
These joys and sorrows are part and parcel of 
the world in which we live. Changes, painful 
and pleasing, are constantly occurring to remind 
us that nothing is stable, nothing lasting. To 
be prepared for them we must be habitually re- 
signed to the will of him who governs them all, 
and who will make all work together for good to 
them that love him. 

I am just recovering from a disease which has 
been very prevalent here, and of which more 
than two thousand persons have died the last 
year in this city — a kind of malignant scarlet 
fever. During the height of the disease I had 
little hope of recovery ; but God has spared me, 
and, as I hope, for some good purpose. It was 
a great comfort to me in my sickness to feel that 
I was in the hands of God, and that I felt willing 
to live or die as he chose. 

On my disease assuming the appearance of 
scarlet fever I became an object of terror to the 
family and neighborhood in which I live. But 
it pleased God to send me two or three friends, 
who watched over me ; and one in particular. 



192 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

to whose kind and assiduous care, during my 
worst night, I attribute, in a great measure, 
under God, the saving of my life. 

In his journal, when speaking on the subject 
of his sickness, Mr. B. says, " May God re- 
ward those who visited, relieved, and com- 
forted one of the least of his disciples in his 
sickness. I have been much affected in view 
of the goodness and mercy of God in my resto- 
ration, and have anew dedicated myself to 
him." 

To his brother, E. W. B., Esq., New Haven, 
he writes : — 

«» May 28. 

All South America is at present in a state of 
warfare, and not much tranquillity can reason- 
ably be expected to prevail in any part of it for 
the next two or three years. On many accounts 
I would gladly leave it for the more peaceful 
part of the continent in which you have the 
good fortune to live ; but at present my interests 
are bound up here, and I do not know when I 
may be able to leave. Commercial intercourse 
between the United States and this country is 
daily growing less, and, in comparison with that 
of former years, may be said to have almost 
ceased. I pray that God will keep and bless 



SOLICITUDE FOR A FRIEND. 193 

you and yours, whether in prosjoerity or adver- 
sity, joy or sorrow. 

Journal. — What a blessing, in this benighted 
part of the world, to hear the gospel preached ! 
To me it is an almost unspeakable privilege, and 
I earnestly pray to God that his holy word, 
whether heard, read, or contemplated, may take 
deep root in my heart, and bring forth the 
fruits of holy living. During the meeting this 
evening I sat by the side of one for whose con- 
version I have long felt peculiarly interested, 
for whom I have often prayed, and with whom 
I have often conversed on the folly and danger 
of an irreligious life. My soul wrestled hard 
for him on this occasion, as on many others ; 
and I do hope it may please God to make him 
willing in the day of his power. I see many 
difficulties in the way of this man's coming to 
Christ ; but I know and am assured that God 
can remove every obstacle, and that he is not to 
be limited in his operations. How much he has 
borne from a rebel like me ; and will he not 
appear for this friend ? Oh that he would give 
himself to Christ ! Then I do know that Christ 
would not refuse him. Even so, come Lord 
Jesus. Ainen. 

To his brother in Boston he writes : — 



194 THE YOUNG CHEISTIAN MERCHANT. 

June 28. 

It grieves me to hear that sister M. is ill ; 
and I shall be anxious until I hear again. How 
true it is that this world is not our home. One 
after another of our friends are taken from us, 
others are sick, others still in trouble, and all 
of us hastening to another world. 

It is a great comfort to know that so many 
of those we love ,are aware of this, and profess 
themselves to be but " strangers and pilgrims," 
looking forward to a celestial dwelling-place, 
" incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away." God be praised ! and may he be pleased 
to grant that we may all there reunite after 
passing through the trials and difficulties to 
which flesh is heir, having our souls purified by 
the blood of Christ, and thus made meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light. 

I suppose you are all at , enjoying the 

balmy air of the country, while I am half 
frozen, keeping my fire warm in the dead of 
winter. I am glad that you are so near uncle 
J. W. while he is suffering under his infirmi- 
ties. I desire to be affectionately remembered 
to him. 

Nothing gives me more pleasure than to hear 
of your success in business. I sincerely hope 
that it may continue so, although I fear that 
you may be a sufferer in the distress under which 



PECUNIARY LOSSES. 195 

the whole commercial world has fallen. For 
myself I dare not think of making any thing. 
I am somewhat afraid of the London bankers. 
If my bills come back protested, I shall be in a 
most unenviable situation. Well, should I return 
to the United States with empty pockets, I hope 
it will not be without clean hands and a pure 
heart. I have now been here so long that I feel 
very much at home. It is becoming almost as 
easy for me to speak the Spanish as English ; 
and if I were settled here, I would not think of 
returning at present ; but it is idle to calculate 
on the future. Consigning all I have to Provi- 
dence, I only hope to live on, with his favor and 
blessing, until he takes me to himself to live 
for ever. I begin to think less of localities in 
this world. Commending you in my prayers to 
him who is able to keep us all, I remam, &c. 



Journal. 

Saturday Evening, Aug. 26. 

It has pleased God of late to afflict me with 
the prospect of heavy pecuniary losses. I have 
often prayed to be delivered from the tempta- 
tions attending such circumstances. I have 
feared that I might be left to do something 
wrong, and bring reproach iipon the cause of 
Ciirist. I know that there are not wanting 
those who are watching for my halting. I have, 



196 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

indeed, been forward to speak, " yea, I have 
not refrained my lips," and now I feel more 
deeply in these reverses the necessity of living 
for Christ. I feel that now. Lord, thou art 
trying me by adversity. If it please thee to 
make me poor in this world, oh, deny me not the 
riches of Christ. Give me strength to resign all 
at thy bidding, counting no sacrifice too great to 
follow thee ; and help me, my Saviour, to 
maintain an unblamable life, that none may take 
offense or stumble at my doings. 

Letter to his youngest brother. 

Nov. 13. 

Very Dear Brother: Among many letters 
which have been accumulating on my desk the 

past few weeks I find yours of . I can not 

tell you the joy it gave me. It was " good news 
from a far country," and refreshed my heart. • 

It grieves me to hear of Christians disputing 
about trifles, while the great doctrines of the 
Bible are not received by so large a portion of 
the human race. I hope you will understand 
for yourself, and work for Christ, and not for 
sectarianism. What I most wish you to avoid 
is a kind of preaching which makes men good 
Sunday Christians, but good for nothing else. I 
love a man who is a Christian all the time. My 
heart has been made sick at seeing some of our 



CHEERFULNESS UNDER LOSSES. 197 

modern proselytes, who have been thrown upon 
foreign shores, and who, having no root, have 
withered away. If you knew how much the 
Christian name had suffered by these stumbling- 
blocks, your heart would bleed. 

You ask me if I am happy ? I answer, yes, 
and thank God ; for he has not failed to support 
me under the loss of nearly, or perhaps quite 
all, my hard earned property. Six months have 
made a great alteration in my worldly affairs. 
Will you believe me, my brother, with all this I 
am happy and resigned. I hardly know which 
way to turn next. I am waiting to see what 
Providence will mark out for me. I may return 
to the United States, and I may not. I bless God 
that in the loss of fortune my good name is left 
unsullied. I never enjoyed my hope in Christ 
better ; and it is my desire to do good to all, as I 
have opportunity ; and I find every day how true 
it is, that in seeking spiritual blessings for others 
they often descend upon ourselves. 

The present state of stagnation in business 
gives me considerable leisure, which I spend in 
reading, studying, or in looking about the coun- 
try, strolling over the wide pampas, which at this 
season of the year are arrayed in all their vernal 
glory. I can give you no adequate idea of 
these vast and beautiful plains, or of the re- 
freshing " pamperos " which come blowing over 



198 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

them. We may some time meet to compare 
notes. 

I occasionally take a walk to the burying-place 
of strangers. It reminds me of my mortality. 
That part of it which belongs to our nation was 
laid out, planted with a variety of trees, and 
ornamented with shrubs, about five years since, 
by a fellow-countryman and myself, we being 
appointed by the citizens here for that purpose. 
It is now a very beautiful spot, and would com- 
pare well with any thing of the kind in North 
America. I am still a trustee of this ground, 
and take a little pride in contemplating my labors 
there. The sexton who lives upon it is a pious 
old Scotsman, and converses with all his native 
brogue and simplicity. I am sometimes inclined 
to think I may find a comfortable grave under 
the trees of my own planting, and that this son 
of Scotia will fill it up for me. This, however, 
will be as God pleases. 

Journal. 

Sabbath Mobning, Nov. 19. 

God, it is my earnest desire to be nearer to 
thee. Pardon and efface those sins which have 
separated me so far from thee. In worshiping 
thee in public, in private, or in the family, let 
thy Spirit direct and comfort me. Grant me a 
token of thy readiness to answer me. Especially 



FILIAL LOVE. 199 

manifest thy willingness to bestow that which 
has of late been the burden of my prayer. Thou 
who art not willing that any should perish, grant 
my petition in behalf of one whose soul I love 
as dearly as my own. Show him his need of 
thee, Christ, and make him willing in the day 
of thy power. Let thy Spirit strive with him. 
Let thy love conquer him. 

Letter to his father. 

Nov. 24, 1837. 

My Dear and Venerated Father : Your long 

and valued letter of lies spread out before 

me. A father's letter should always be held in 
estimation, and the more so when it has been 
written in despite of age and infirmities. I am 
thus made sensible of your kindness and affec- 
tion by the sacrifice of ease you must have made 
to write it, as well as by your letter which over- 
flows with both. In the late distressing crisis in 
commercial affairs I have had to share deeply, 
but I believe that I have some small amount of 
funds in the United States, which are, or will be 
in the hands of brother J. ; and while there is 
any thing left you are at liberty to make use of 
it as you may find necessary to your comfort ; 
you need only apply to him. My own affairs 
here are so confused at this moment that I can 
hardly say whether I am solvent or insolvent. 



200 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

It requires some courage and fortitude to bear 
up under severe disappointments and losses ; but 
I bless God the Christian's hope supports and 
consoles me. It has been my aim to maintain 
it in lively exercise in prosperity, and now I find 
it cheering me in adversity. The longer I live 
the more I prize the gospel. The more I see of 
the world the nearer am I constrained to keep 
to my Saviour. These are my present feelings. 
May God preserve me in the same. May he 
sustain you as he has sustained me. 

The concert of prayer for our family, of which 
you speak, I duly observe. You are always re- 
membered, the first evening of every month. 



SAILS FOR BOSTON. 201 



CHAPTER Xm. 



Voyage to the United States. — In Boston. — Letter to his Sister in K. 
— Letter to his youngest Brother. — Journal of a Voyage up the 
Mississippi to Xatchez. —Sabbath Visiting. — Extracts from Let- 
ters to his Brothers. — Incidents. — Cemetery in New Orleans. — 
Returns to Boston. — Death of his Uncle. 



In his journal he writes : — 

At Sea, (South Atlantic Ocean,) Feb. 10, 1838. 

Having made my preparations and bade fare- 
well to friends in Buenos Ayres, I embarked 
January 3d, and sailed from the outer roads at 
daylight the next morning. By the blessing of 
Almighty God our voyage has been pursued 
hitherto uninterrupted by any adverse circum- 
stances. On the 7th inst. we anchored off the 
city of Pernambuco, and went on shore for re- 
freshments. Having obtained these, we sailed 
again the same day. I left Buenos Ayres with 
mingled pain and pleasure. I parted with pain 
from some friends to whom I had become strong- 
ly attached, and who, I believe, reciprocated my 
attachment. I left with pleasure, because my 
pecuniary affairs called me to my native land ; 
and I indulged the hope of soon meeting with 
those I love, and who, I believe, have not for- 
gotten me. 



202 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Again cut off from all intercourse with those 
who appear to worship my heavenly Father, J 
lean upon his arm singly and alone. I think I 
see his goodness displayed in all his dealings 
with us, notwithstanding the murmuring and 
constant fault-finding of our commander. 

After leaving Pernambuco, our voyagers were 
detained by adverse winds, and their passage to 
New York from Buenos Ayres proved one of 
eighty days. 

In his journal he writes : — 

Boston, April 1, 1838. 

I landed in New York 24th of March, and 
arrived here jn the 30th, after an absence of 
more than two and a half years. My heart over* 
flows in reviewing the great goodness of God in 
my preservation and my restoration to this city, 
where I first dedicated myself to him. Wher- 
ever I am, it is enough that God is with me, and 
permits me to hope in him. The strivings of 
my soul after holiness, known only to God and 
myself, I hope here to maintain, although I do 
not expect any more real Christian communion 
with others, even in this land of churches and 
professing Christians, than I have enjoyed among 
the few humble followers of Jesus in lands of 
idolatry and superstition. I have just been per> 



REUNION WITH FRIENDS. 203 

mitted to unite with my brethren in the celebra- 
tion of the Lord's Supper, and have found it 
pleasant and refreshing thus to renew my vows 
in company with those with whom I first made 
them. 

From his journal : — 

April 29. 

Uncertain in regard to the future of this life, 
I desire to lean on God, to go where in his provi- 
dence he would send me, there to remain, or 
thence depart, as he shall direct. Oh for a con- 
stant resignation to his will. 

Letter to his sister in Keene, N. H. : — 

April 25. 

My Dear Sister: I have abundant reason 
to thank God for his goodness to us all. Few 
members of families as large as ours, could re- 
turn from a three years' voyage, and find so few 
among the missing ; so many enjoying the favor 
and the blessings of Heaven. The cry of " Land, 
ho ! " is pleasant when homeward bound, but 
always causes some forebodings ; for who can 
tell what he must hear as he sets his foot on 
shore. The suspense is truly painful; joy re- 
turns only when he reads in the faces of welcom- 
ing friends the pleasing tidings that all's well. 

I fear my pecuniary affairs will once more 
drive me abroad. I find my country in such a 



204 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

state, also, that I doubt if I could content my- 
self to sit down in any part of it at present. 

To the same : — 

The settlement of my old affairs has perplexed 
me, and will continue to perplex for the present. 
I have experienced one of those trials so common 
in this world — a betrayal of confidence. One 
in whom I had reposed great trust, has deter- 
mined to put my patience and good will to the 
test. I pray God that I may suffer in a Chris- 
tian spirit. 

Casting about for business, Mr. B. visited New 
York and some portion of the West ; but finally 
determined to go South in our own country, and 
establish himself in a commission business. He 
first writes to his youngest brother, then at 
W , Mass : — 

Boston, Oct. 9, 1838. 

My Dear Brother : I hoped to have heard 
from you ere I left, that I might know how our 
aged and infirm parent was. I desire to be 
affectionately remembered to him, and if there 
is any thing which you may think I can do to 
alleviate his cares or his wants, you must write 
me. soon through brother J. My love to mother. 
I often think of her and her untiring atten- 
tions to father. Also to Mrs. B.* I wish to be 

* A poor, invalid neighbor. 



JOURNEY TO NEW ORLEANS. 205 

remembered. I hope she has bright visions 
of the future, and looks upward and forward. 
I feel like a sojourner, as I am, indeed, for the 
present. Heaven is desirable from fevery point 
of view ; and I will assure you, as a resting 
place, where no more journeys are to be taken, 
the contemplation of it is very pleasant. 

I anticipate a passage of twenty-five days to 
New Orleans, and six or seven more to Natchez. 
I am a bird of passage, following the wild geese 
and other feathered tribes to the warmer re- 
gions ; and I hope to follow them back next 
spring to meet you, ere again the song of the tur- 
tle is heard in the land. Yours, in double bonds. 

Journal. 

Mississippi Eiver, Nov. 7, 1838. 

During the passage from Boston we have been 
favored with fine weather and fair breezes. A 
man professing religion for a captain, and a 
pious passenger in company, made the voyage 
more pleasant to me. It has grieved me, how- 
ever, that we have not been able to worship the 
Being whom we serve, unitedly and in a social 
manner. Our Sabbaths, too, have passed with- 
out our assembling ourselves together. As 
there were none on board to oppose, why should 
not a few Christians be as ready to acknowledge 
God as the heathen mariners of China are to 



206 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

sacrifice to their images ? I endeavored to 
press the duty upon the captain, but ' found 
him to have a ready excuse : " I do not begin, 
because I might not be able to persevere. I fear 
that I might not live before my crew consistently 
as a praying man, and I think it much better to 
neglect the duty altogether than to perform it, 
and live inconsistently." He appears to be a 
sincere Christian ; I can not, however, but class 
him with a host of my Lord's professing follow- 
ers, who prefer following him at a distance. 
Who does not know that the Lord helps those 
that trust in him ? Suppose the world scoff at 
those failings which, to humble us, God suffers 
us now and then to exhibit, shall we, for fear of 
this, neglect what he has commanded ? What 
would be done with the servant who would re- 
fuse to honor his master in public, lest he should 
attract the gaze of his enemies by sometimes, in- 
advertently, forgetting him ? What son would 
refuse to manifest his love for his father lest his 
companions should taunt him with having once 
offended this parent ? 

Mr. B., having a consignment of goods to 
Natches, spent four or five weeks in that place 
in attention to business, and then returned to 
New Orleans, where he designed to spend the 
winter. 



NATCHES. 207 

Journal. 

Natches, Miss., Sabbath, Nov. 18, 1838. 

We arrived here on Saturday, 10th, and the 
following day, as well as to-day, I have been 
permitted to attend public worship. Although 
these seasons are precious to me, yet, even at 
such times, how various and inconsistent are my 
thoughts ! and how must I appear to him who is 
omniscient, while I am revolving in my mind, at 
the same time, plans for gain or worldly profit, 
the pleasures of sense, or the trifles of earth ? 
Yet such is my weakness, and such are my fail- 
ings. I strive to overcome them, and, bless God, 
I sometimes get the victory. In this commu- 
nity, where profanity is so rife, how pleasant to 
find a company of Christians to worship and 
serve our common Saviour! Who that ever 
tasted and found him gracious could not say 
with the Psalmist, " My heart was glad when 
they said unto me. Let us go up to the house 
of the Lord." The worldliness of Christians, 
especially those that sojourn here for a time, 
surprises me. I am grieved to find that most 
of those who come and go, belonging to churches 
in other places, here pass themselves off as men 
having no regard to piety. For instance, a pro- 
fessing Christian was invited yesterday, by a 
profane and Sabbath-breaking man, to take 
horses and go out to-day (Sunday) on a pleas- 



208 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

ure trip into the country. Without courage 
enough to say that he was accustomed to attend 
church and keep the Sabbath, or that he wished 
to serve God at least one day in the seven, he 
foolishly accepted the proposal and consented to 
go. On his informing me of it, and regretting 
that he " had to go," as he said, I remonstrated 
with him, and told him, in a kind way, that as 
he had done a similar thing the previous Sab- 
bath, I had hoped the present would be kept 
more sacred. So this morning word was sent 
to his friend that he did not feel very well, and 
that he could not go. His friend came to in- 
quire for his health, and found him absent, as 
he had gone to church. Having thus detected 
this falsehood, he lay in wait for him as he came 
home, and I believe succeeded, after all, in lead- 
ing him to break the Sabbath ; for he was not 
present at public worship in the afternoon. 

Another instance. Two professing Christians, 
both from New England, had casually become 
acquainted in the course of business, each 
equally ignorant that the other bore the name 
of his Master, each supposing the other to be- 
long to the great class of worldly men. Last 
Sabbath, one wishing to show some attention to 
his new customer, proposed that he should join 
him in a ride out on the railroad, to spend the 
day at a neighboring plantation. The other> 



INCONSISTENCIES OF CHRISTIANS. 209 

not having courage to make known his convic- 
tions, professed to be pleased, and acquiesced. 
Here, then, these two gentlemen, whose piety 
and whose example, while in New England, 
had not been called in question, turned from 
God's house to trample on his holy day. They 
arrive at the mansion of their friend, vacated of 
its inmates, the unconverted host being at 
church with a converted wife and rising fam- 
ily. They wait his return, are received, stay to 
dinner, get through late, and keep the whole 
family from the house of God in the afternoon. 
On their return, under such circumstances, what 
will be the feelings with which the evening peti- 
tions are offered ? Can it be that such men are 
the lights of the world ? Is religion a plant be- 
longing only to one clime ? Must it die out at 
every removal ? Or does it relax its claims on 
the follower of Christ when he steps over a cer- 
tain boundary ? Where is that moral courage 
so prominent in the early ages ? Could thou- 
sands then go cheerfully to the stake and the 
scaffold, bearing taunts and ridicule, and wit- 
nessing a good confession ? Why, in these 
times, do thousands, professing to be actuated 
by the same holy principles, shrink, and often 
backslide, at the gaze and stare of one or more 
of their fellow-worms ? 



210 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Natches, Sabbath, Nov. 25, 1838. 

I have this day renewed my vows by publicly 
uniting with a Christian church here in the cele- 
bration of the Lord's Supper. It is pleasant to 
find, in this community, so many professing to love 
the Lord Jesus Christ. The invitation, through 
the pastor, to all members of other churches 
providentially present, of whatever denomina- 
tion, was both liberal and pleasing. The weak 
were encouraged to come, the immoral and im- 
penitent were warned off, while they who would 
stay to witness, as spectators, the interesting 
scenes, were earnestly entreated to become fol- 
lowers of the Lamb. The table, although long, 
was filled, and many sat in the pews. I enjoyed, 
I hope, the divine presence ; and I look forward 
to that time when every member of that church, 
now unknown to me, shall be recognized by me 
in that inheritance which is incorruptible, unde- 
filed, and which fadeth not away. 

New Orleans, Sabbath, Feb. 17, 1839. 

I arrived here on the 21st last month, a 
stranger, indeed ; but I began with the feeling 
that God was my friend, and with his presence 
and care over me what lack I ? It was, and is 
now, my prayer, that I may be useful wherever 
I may be ; that my life may not be spent in 
vain. The year 1838, which I began on the 



NEW ORLEANS. 211 

other side of the world, closed upon me here. 
I have commenced the present under very dif- 
ferent auspices, at least in a worldly point of 
view. Here I am in this, I may almost say, 
" Potter's Field ; " for it is literally a burying 
place for strangers — a place I have shunned 
heretofore, but at last have come to sojourn in. 
Well, it is very possible that I, who have escaped 
many perils, may yet become a victim to its 
pestilences, and a tenant of its swampy cem- 
etery. However that may be, I know that I am, 
as ever, in the hands of my heavenly Father ; 
that if he has aught for me to do, he will spare 
me, and if not, he will take me to himself; and 
my prayer is. Thy will be done. 

In one of Mr. B.'s letters we find the follow- 
ing sentences, revealing an interesting trait of 
character : — 

" I wish that whenever, in any of my letters, 
I give my opinions on business, or other subjects, 
and you think I err in judgment, you would 
always be frank to tell me. You must remem- 
ber that I have been so long away from those 
who would, from charity, tell me of my failings, 
that I am now under the greater necessity of 
making this claim upon my friends. I assure 
you I will always be grateful for such a service ; 
and the plainer my friends may be, the more 
thankful I shall be." 



212 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

In another letter he says : — 

" I have been surprised at the degree of pro- 
faneness which exists in this city. I never was 
in a community which used so frequently and 
so lightly the sacred names of Jehovah and 
Jesus." 

The following incident will show the sterling 
integrity with which Mr. B. transacted business, 
and how little the principles by which he was ac- 
tuated were understood by some around him : — 

"I had sold a man some merchandise, amount- 
ing to nine dollars. Some days after delivering 
it I made out my bill without consulting my 
memorandum, amounting to ten dollars ; car- 
ried it, and received the money. A few days 
afterward, on consulting my memorandum, I 
found I had unintentionally collected one dol- 
lar too much, and went to the person to pay it 
back. He was a very fair dealing man, and is 
considered one of the most upright merchants 

in . He said he had forgotten the price 

when he paid me ; but on my tendering to him 
the dollar, he immediately remembered that he 
had paid me too much, and took it, heartily 
laughing at my honest simplicity, declaring that 
such a thing was never known in this country. 
A day or two after I came suddenly upon him 
in the street, talking with five or six others, and 



" THE HONEST YANKEE." 213 

found him telling them, to their great merri- 
ment, of the honest Yankee, who had not been 
from homo long enough to have learned the 
customs of the world ; and I was so situated 
that I was unable to tell them the source of my 
honesty, but was obliged to leave them to im- 
pute it to my simplicity." 

Letter to his youngest brother. 

New Orleans, Feb. 17. 

My Dear Brother : This day has been a 
pleasant one to me. I have been occupied by 
its customary duties and privileges, and feel 
happy that at its close there is room to write to 
you. On my second Sabbath in New Orleans I 
offered my services to a, Sabbath school, and also 
to a choir in church, and, although a stranger, 
I was well received by both, and my offers were 
accepted — the last assigning me a seat in front 
of the organ, and the first choosing me one of a 
committee of three to visit and go into the high- 
ways and byways, to find and bring in the little 
wanderers, that they might be taught the won- 
ders of redeeming love. To-day, in my rambles 
on my errand of mercy, I came near the cem- 
etery, and, in the absence of children to attract 
me, I was led by curiosity to enter. I lingered 
among the tombs for a time, and finally came iu 
contact with a long tier of graves, three or four 



214 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

stories in height, erected ahove ground — a novel 
mode of burial, certainly, but a good one — 
where the earth can not be penetrated more 
than three or four inches without coming to 
WSiteT. I walked along this line, resembling, 
at a distance, a gun battery with numerous 
ports, reading the short and melancholy tale of 
the once-loved, now lifeless, tenant of the tomb. 
But to describe the mode more fully. The 
structure is composed of brick, with cells of 
sufficient size to admit a coffin endwise. One 
rises above another. The apertures are left 
open until occupied, when they are either closed 
with brick or a marble tablet, bearing some kind 
of inscription. A long tier is built in winter to 
get ready for summer ; and when the contagion 
furnishes more subjects 'than there are cells, 
watery trenches are opened in which they are 
sunk. I was pleased to see a goodly number 
erecting for the coming season, although I hope 
they may not all be needed. 

I could not but observe how every thing about 
this unpleasant spot coincided with tlie circum- 
stances here attending death. Tliere is, as a 
physician remarked, very little sickness in New 
Orleans. Life takes a sudden departure. Death 
but calls, and liis victims make haste to follow. 
The stranger is overtaken and carried off un- 
awares. His obsequies are hurried — few mourn- 



CEMETERY AT NEW ORLEANS. 215 

ers or none attend. The mason and the trowel 
take the place of the grave-digger; and his 
shovel and he, depending on death for his liv- 
ing, (if I may so say,) seems to have worked, 
like his patron and master, with a quiet and 
rapid hand — hardly finishing the interment of 
one before he breaks off to begin upon another. 
Thus the little portals are closed, as with a care- 
less hand, the bricks laid in haste. The plaster 
is scattered on in singular confusion, while 
hardly enough of the surface is smoothed over 
to admit the scrawling initials made with the 
point of a stick in the drying mortar. About 
half of these apertures are furnished with mar- 
ble tablets, whose inscriptions are also in char- 
acter. These indicate that the departed had a 
friend ; and many of them appear to have been 
placed there by one who, spurred on by the first 
deep pang of bereavement, found some allevi- 
ation in ordering one of these testimonials from 
the hands of the stone-cutter. How simple and 
touching are the real mourner's words! He 
cares not for dates or numbers, and these are 
omitted. One simply contains, " My brother 
William;" another, "Here lies Fidelia;" an- 
otlier, " My dearest friend ; " another, simply 
the name ; others the initials. I noticed that 
those tablets, apparently supplied some time after 
interment, contained long and labored inscrip- 



216 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

tions — a proof of lessened grief, for mourners' 
words are few. Where the age is inscribed, 
how melancholy to observe that by far the 
greater number were men from twenty-two to 
thirty-five ! When dates of death were added, 
the month and year proclaimed the season of 
the raging pestilence that cut them down. 
When professions were stated, it was curious to 
see how Death called on all — the pious minis- 
ter, the enterprising merchant, the respected 
shipmaster, the dutiful clerk, the useful me- 
chanic, father, husband, son, and brother ; all 
lay in the order in which they come to be en-, 
tombed. Where places of birth were registered, 
the summary told that every state in the Union 
had sent forth its victims ; and, as if the dread 
tyrant of the tomb was not content with this, 
England, France, Germany, and other countries 
of Europe, had contributed their sons to appease 
him. It occurred to me that hero might be my 
final resting place ; but it was hard to bring my 
mind to contemplate this with that calmness 
with which I have been accustomed to look upon 
the beautiful spot on the bank of the Rio de la 
Plata. The young growing cypress trees, which 
I helped to plant in that cemetery, I have loved 
to look upon as quiet sentinels to watch about 
my silent home. 



CHARACTER OF NEW ORLEANS. 217 

I know and feel that, comparatively, it is 
unimportant where the body is laid when the 
soul has fled ; and yet, in spite of myself, I 
prayed to be delivered from interment in this 
miry swamp — this valley of mud and bones — 
this loathsome, pestilential charnel-house ! A 
friend, in whom I feel some interest, accompany- 
ing me, the agreement was made, in view of the 
uncertainty of life, that the last survivor should, 
if in this region, see the other decently interred, 
marking the spot for the satisfaction of distant 
or approaching friends. 

To his sister in Keene he writes : 

" Business here has been so dull as almost to 
discourage me. But a kind providence has 
favored me above some hundreds who expected 
more at setting out than I did. So far as reli- 
gion or morals are concerned I think some of 
the foreign cities I have lived in far before New 
Orleans. For comfort and the conveniences of 
life, this place is inferior to Buenos Ayres or 
Rio Janeiro. The city seems almost to deserve 
the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah. Still we may 
hope, as God is merciful, that there are righteous 
men enough to save it for the present. There is 
a wide field here for the Christian and the phi- 
lanthropist ; but it wants the courage of a St. 



218 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Paul to stem the torrent of vice that assails 
one on every side." * 

In June Mr. B. returned to Boston, where 
he passed the summer in comparative leisure, 
a part of the time enjoying himself among his 
relatives and friends, and a part of the time, as 
will appear in the following letter, attending, 
with a heart full of kindness, upon tiie last sick- 
ness of a beloved uncle. 

Thursday Morning, Oct. 3, 1839. 

Dear Brother and Sister : I wrote you a 
few days since, informing you of the ilhiess of 
uncle J. W. Now it becomes my painful duty 
to record his death. He departed this life this 
morning. I was present, and closed his eyes in 
his last struggle. I can hardly describe my feel- 
ings as I performed this sad service. What 
shall I say but that God is just and merciful, 
and will do all things right, rendering to every 
man according to his works ? ' We must leave 
him in his hands. In his life he has been a 
friend and benefactor to many, as you yourselves 
can testify. In business, he was honest and re- 
spected above the throng, and even in adversity 
and severe temptation, his intentions and efforts 
to do strict justice to all are not to be questioned. 

* That a most favorable change has taken place in the state of soci- 
ety in New Orleans since the above was written, is well known. 



DEATH OF HIS UNCLE. 219 

His disease was an aggravated case of bilious 
fever, which, together with his recent misfor- 
tunes in business coming upon him at the ad- 
vanced age of threescore and ten, combined to 
render his case hopeless from the beginning. 
It is a great satisfaction to me that I have been 
permitted to be with him during his last illness. 

To his father, under the same date, in connec- 
tion with some of the above particulars, he 
adds : — 

" This dispensation of Providence has de- 
prived us of one of our nearest relatives and 
friends ; and I trust that all who have shared 
his generosity and friendship will long revere 
his memory. He was in many respects a ben- 
efactor to my dear mother and our family gen- 
erally, and as such has deserved our esteem and 
affection. May God, our heavenly Father, who 
does all things right, cause us rightly to under- 
stand this afflictive event. Let us hear his 
voice, which warns us to be also ready. 

" Finally, my father, what more shall I say ? 
Time is hurrying us all to that ' undiscovered 
country from whose bourn no traveler returns ; ' 
and these places that once knew him, who now 
lies a corpse, and that know us, shall soon know 
us no more for ever." 



220 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER XIY. 

Letter to his Sister in Keene. — Voyage to New Orleans. — Ship- 
wreck. — Letter from New York to his Sister in Keene. — Mar- 
riage, and Arrangements for Sailing to Buenos Ayres. 

Mr. Blake's intention at this time was to 
return to Buenos Ayres, where he had spent so 
much time and with which he had many inter- 
esting associations. He writes, however, to his 
sister in Keene, November 3 : " Discouraging 
advices from the River Plata, of a political and 
commercial nature, have hitherto prevented me 
from prosecuting my voyage to that part of the 
world. I have concluded to abandon it, at least 
for the winter. The prospect is so poor that I 
hope to gain by deferring it. The times are no 
better, but rather worse, and there is every 
probability that the business of the country must 
be almost or entirely prostrated before there can 
be a radical change for the better." 

To the same he writes again : — 

Nov. 25. 

My Dear Sister : I left Boston on Saturday, 
and came to spend the Sabbath with sister F., 



YOYAGE TO NEW ORLEANS. 221 

intending to return this morning, but the driving 
storm detains me ; thus giving me time to reply 
to your last. I feel very grateful for your gen- 
erous invitation, but am now on the eve of sailing 
for the West Indies, and must forego what would 
be to me a very great satisfaction. To-morrow 
is the day fixed for sailing, but owing to the 
storm I shall not get away so soon. 

I take passage in the schooner Glide, for Ha- 
vana, where I shall be detained for a few days 
by business, and then leave for New Orleans, 
where I design to spend the winter, and return 
in the spring. At one time I had nearly con- 
cluded to spend the winter in New England, but 
as it must have been in comparative idleness, 
I was afraid of the result; and, therefore, de- 
termined to venture abroad, as a lesser evil, 
although the risks of business are greater than 
ever. 

I feel truly grateful that I am permitted to 
be on ter7'a firma during the prevailing storm. 
Many must have suffered intensely the past night 
at sea. Probably no tongue can tell what an- 
guish hundreds have felt. I close, with love to 
all, and an affectionate adieu. 

The voyage contemplated as above was com- 
menced, but ended disastrously, as will appear 



222 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

from tlie following lively and graphic letter to a 
sister-in-law in New York : — 

March 30, 1840. 

Dear Sister A. : I propose, in answer to 
your request, to give you a short account of 
my recent shipwreck. 

After being ready for sea, our little vessel was 
wind-bound in port ten days, but finally left 
Boston on the 10th of December, 1839. The 
day was an unusual one for the season ; the 
weather very mild ; the wind fair from W. S. W., 
and every thing propitious. After getting clear 
of the wharf, there was an opportunity to ex- 
amine the countenances of those who were to 
accompany me on our passage to Havana. 

The captain was a man over fifty years of age, 
experienced and qualified. Although apparently 
lacking a little in energy, yet, as he appeared 
good-natured and easy of access, and susceptible 
of being influenced by counsel, I did not con- 
sider the failing of much importance. The 
mate was a foreigner by birth; a little, talk- 
ative, bustling man ; pretending to know more 
than any body else — giving his opinion where 
it was not asked or needed, and in cases where 
he knew nothing of the premises — fond of the 
marvelous ; disposed to take side against the 
captain, and with the seamen, consequently pro- 



DESCRIPTION OF THE CREW. 223 

diicing strife and bickering. The steward was 
as deaf as an adder, never hearing the call of 
captain, mate, or passenger, excepting at his 
own convenience. Complaints were all uttered 
to the winds ; and no improvement could be 
expected in his cooking, which bade fair, at the 
first meal, to be as bad as his hearing. We had 
three seamen before the mast — Fred, a Swede; 
Jake, a Dutchman; and Bob, an Englishman. 
Fred was a good sailor ; Jake was considerably 
above par in his calling ; but Bob was good for 
nothing. There was another person on board, 
Avho had taken passage as we were pushing off. 
It was a woman, whose finery and general appear- 
ance, together with the fact of her being alone 
and unprotected on board a vessel, an entire 
stranger to every one, led us to suspect that all 
was not right. When I saw her, before we passed 
the island in the harbor, take out a bunch of 
cigars from her baggage, familiarly offering them 
around to the rest of us, lighting one for herself 
and smoking, my own mind was made up in 
regard to her character. However, being the 
only one of the sex on board, she was dignified 
by the appellation of "Madam," no one taking 
the trouble to inquire whether she had any name, 
or went without one. Thus we altogether made 
a company of eight souls. 

The day of our sailing was a remarkably fine 



224 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

one for the season ; so much so, indeed, that it 
was set down as a weather-breeder, and, besides 
the necessary precautions usually taken on put- 
ting to sea, we began to prepare for a storm. 
We had the misfortune, on passing down the 
harbor, to strike twice or three times on the rocks 
off a beacon called " Nix's Mate," too near to 
which we approached by mistake. The rudder 
struck the last time, and the captain, being at 
the helm, was thrown down upon deck by the 
action of the tiller. It was supposed that we 
had received no injury, although I had my fears, 
and proposed that we should not go to sea before 
we had found out the fact by reconnoitering. 
We kept on, however. Throughout the night 
and the next day it was pleasant weather, and in 
the course of the evening of the 11th we entered 
the Gulf Stream. Before midnight, however, 
we took a severe gale from the S. E., which split 
one of our sails, compelling us to lay to. This 
lasted twelve hours ; the vessel laboring heavily, 
straining her timbers, and increasing a small 
leak which we discovered after striking on Nix's 
Mate. A strong north-wester generally follows 
a south-easter, as it did in this case, blowing with 
unabated fury for five or six days. We scud 
before the gale, under a foresail close-reefed, and 
mainsail balance-reefed. The first was blown 
to pieces during the first twelve hours. The 



VIOLENT STORM. 225 

second was split, making it necessary to furl, in 
order to save it. 

We continued under bare poles, the sea run- 
ning very high ; and our little bark, without 
sails, being rendered unmanageable, we almost 
despaired of escaping the violence of the waves, 
and trembled in view of what even a day might 
bring forth. At night we dared not calculate 
for the morrow. In the morning we were sure 
that sufficient unto the day was the evil thereof, 
and only inquired how we might live until night. 
The leak increased, and on the thirteenth it re- 
quired one pump to be kept constantly going to 
prevent its gaining upon us. The vessel strained 
and groaned through her whole length. The 
stanchions and berth-boards in the forecastle fell 
down, and the dormitory of the seamen became 
so wet and uncomfortable that they requested as 
a favor that they might lie down upon the cabin 
floor. Perhaps you would like to take a peep 
at us, as we reel to and fro upon the deep, and 
anxiously wait to know our fate. I do not know 
how to bring you safely ; but suppose you come 
on the wings of the wind, and see if you can 
catch sight of a small schooner, without sails, as 
she hangs upon her mountain waves. Be quick, 
or she will sink into the trough of the sea and 
be out of sight again. 

That is the " Glide," from Boston. Now, 
15 



226 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

come a little nearer. See that man pumping ; 
another at the helm watching every sea, and as 
a dangerous one approaches, giving the alarm. 
A few shreds of canvas are hanging from the 
gaffs, while the vessel scuds simply by the force 
of the winds against the masts. Suppose you 
are on board ; look at those broken lashings, 
those shattered bulwarks, that capsized caboose, 
that started plank-shire, that open waterway- 
seam, that strongly seamed but still weak com- 
panion-way. See how our ship labors and works 
the oakum out of her deck-seams, and chews up 
the pitch as if in agony. Now catch your chance 
and come below. There are two exhausted 
sailors sleeping on the floor. Your humble ser- 
vant, occupying the starboard state room, is sit- 
ting in the doorway holding on to the lashings 
of a trunk. The captain, weary with watching, 
is unconsciously snoring in his berth. The stew- 
ard who, heeding not the creaking of the timbers, 
nor the brisk working of the pump, which rises 
through the cabin, and seems to sweat with toil, 
is sitting on a chest trying to light some lucifer 
matches that have had a salt-water ducking. 
Hark ! a woman is calling at the top of her voice, 
" Steward, steward ! " The cry comes from a 
dark state room on the larboard side. " Stew- 
ard, steward I ^^ The deaf man scrapes match 
after match, but remains unconscious of the fact 



STORM — ALARM. 227 

that any one is hailing him. "Oh, I never ; 
what is the fellow about ? " ." What will you 
have, madam ? " said one, awakened by this 
shrieking. " I want the steward." " What will 
yon have him do ? " " Oh, the water comes down 
into my berth, so that I am wet as a drowned 
rat ! " " Well, never mind, madam; in an hour 
or two we may be all under water ; so don't be 
afraid of a few drops now." " Oh ! oh ! you 
don't say we are in such danger! oh, what shall I 
do ? I can't stay in here all alone ! " This is 
no sooner uttered than out she comes, undressed, 
hair disheveled, and from not choosing her 
steps and taking hold, she is thrown from side 
to side as the vessel rolls. She tries to awake 
the captain, but I protest against it, and per- 
suade her to return to her state room. " What 
can I do there, all alone ? " " Oh, there is 
enough for you to do ; say your prayers, and 
prepare to die." "Ave Maria! " she exclaims, 
pulling out a crucifix and kissing it. I shake 
the steward, bawl in his ears, and send him to 
turn her bed over. It is near night. Our dis- 
mal cabin is lighted by a lamp whose glimmer- 
ing rays seem as precarious as our own uncertain 
existence. The time for supper has come. The 
lockers are opened, and the steward arranges upon 
the floor, in the most secure places, a few thick 
slices of raw ham, a part of a cheese, a string of 



228 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

onions, a pitcher of water, a traj of bread, some 
raw herrings, &c. ; and all that can be spared 
are called to partake. No cooking has been 
done since a heavy sea has swept the caboose 
from its place, but no one complains. All appar- 
ently enjoy what is set before them. If any find 
the variety insufficient, there is a pile of raw 
salt pork spread over one half this cabin, which 
has been taken from the " harness casks " on deck 
and thrown below for fear the waves might 
wash it off. This can be drawn upon. Perhaps 
the pump, whose regular strokes have become 
familiar, ceases to work all at once. It may be 
the man who plies it is tired and has stopped for 
breath. It may be that the boxes have worn 
out. It may be that the sea that has just swept 
over the deck has swept off one of. the hands. 
All is suspense. None care to learn the worst, 
and there is a general waiting to see if the pump 
will not begin again. It moves at last; our 
hopes revive, and suspended jaws begin again to 
masticate. 

Supper through, the watch is relieved, and 
tlie rested ones take their stations on deck. 
A turn at the pump falls to my lot, and pity 
for the poor sailors leads me to do my duty with 
alacrity; so that no dead water shall remain 
when I resign to another. My time is up. I 
return to the cabin wearied ; lie down in my 



STORM — MOMENTARY SLEEP. 229 

berth ; breathe a silent prayer for resignation ; 
feel it ; sing aloud — 

*• I would not live alway, I ask not to stay, 

Where storm after storm rises dark o'er the way. 

The few lurid moments that dawn on us here, 

Are enough for life's woes, full enough for its cheer." 

Sleep comes over me ; I am transported to other 
scenes ; find myself escaped from every peril, 
and enjoying the society of my friends in my 
native land. The raging sea, dashing against 
the frail plank that forms one side of my berth, 
makes a musical bass to the whistling of the 
wind through our bulwarks and rigging, while 
the pump beats time with the regularity of a 
drum; these sounds lull to sleep the weary 
mariner. 

But oh ! if the pump ceases, the dream is 
spoiled ; tlie charm is broken, and there is no 
more sleep until it is once more in motion. 
What between sleeping and waking the night 
wears heavily away. At the change of the 
watches the seamen come down, cursing the time 
they shipped in this vessel and swearing never 
to ship again in a similar one. I can not but 
rebuke them, and remind the most forward of 
them, who was Jake, that he might never again 
have an opportunity to ship at all. He admitted 
that it might be so, and that it was foolish to 



230 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

Titter useless wishes and regrets. Eight hours 
elapsed. A tremendous sea strikes the schooner, 
throws her upon her side, the water rushes 
down the companion. In the cabin we are 
thrown from our berths. Every thing is upset 
and swimming in water. The first impression 
is that we are sinking. The lights are extin- 
guished, and all is darkness and confusion. All 
below are inquiring. What is the matter ? On 
deck all is still, save the dashing of the waters 
and the roaring of the winds. After finding the 
companion stairs we make an effort to get out, 
but to our dismay we find that we are shut 
down, and it is impossible to move the door. 
"We hail them on deck. No one answers at first. 
The woman shrieks with fear, and calls upon the 
saints. The men are dumb from fright. I in- 
sist on finding an ax to cut our way out. We 
find one ; simultaneously a voice is heard on 
deck. The vessel begins to right. The ax is 
passed out through an aperture, that the person 
without, who proves to be the mate, may cut 
away some of the spars that bind us down. We 
are relieved, and inquire of the mate who is lost ? 
he answers. No one ; that he had been washed 
off, but had regained the vessel by being borne 
back by the swash of the sea ! He comes down 
in the cabin and inquires for Jake. I informed 
him that he went up just before the sea struck 



A MAN LOST. 231 

US. " Then he is gone ! " said he, running up in 
haste, and calling at the top of his voice, " Jacob ! 
Jacob ! " No one answered, nor could it have 
been expected, for we w^ere two or three miles 
from the place where he had left us. " Ah, 
poor Jacob ! " was the expression of all. " He 
was the best man we had," added one. " I was 
afraid he would go first, when he cursed so last 
night," said another. " Jacob was rich," added 
a shipmate the next day ; "he had four hundred 
dollars in the savings bank in New York. He 
was to be married when he returned ; and now 
w^ho will have his property ? " 

After pumping out the extra water, and throw- 
ing off the deck load to lighten the schooner, 
daylight appearing, we began to think of eating 
again. Jake, (or Jacob as he was called after 
his death, in respect to his memory,) continued 
to be the subject of conversation ; but as the day 
passed he was forgotten, except now and then 
one would be heard envying the lot of one who 
was beyond the reach of pain, toil, and anxiety. 

Now, I will suppose you, my dear sister, again 
on land. You have seen the occurrences of part 
of a day and a night. Such was the experience 
of the loth of December, and the night follow- 
ing. Our sails, even those that were furled, 
had blown to pieces, and we had scarcely a rag 
fit to set. It was nearly a day's work to place 



232 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

things in as good order as they were the day be- 
fore. The gale continuing, we thought it safer 
to lay to, on account of the sea, which was ter- 
rific. I suggested that we should heave to under 
some pieces of canvas stretched up and down on 
the rigging; these we had prepared by four 
o'clock, p. M., of Monday the sixteenth. Our 
condition did not now appear much safer than 
before, but on some accounts it was preferable. 

I forgot to say that on the second day out 
" Madam " invited me to play at cards, which 
invitation I declined of course. But I was 
amused to hear her inform the captain on the 
fifteenth or sixteenth, during the hardest of the 
gale, that she Avas considerably troubled in con- 
science for having a pack of cards on board, at 
the same time handing them to him and request- 
ing that they might be cast overboard to propi- 
tiate the storm. The captain took them as if he 
had discovered the origin of our troubles, and 
rushing on deck, called the crew to witness the 
deed ; he threw them into tlie sea, as the men 
shouted in token of approbation. One single 
card was by the wind returned on board, and it 
excited some curiosity to know what the omen 
could mean. Madam suggested that it was on 
account of the man that was lost ; while it was 
considered by others to signify that only one of 
us all should be saved. Our captain was par- 



RELIEF IN SIGHT. 233 

ticiilar in examining to see if he had the full 
complement, without which it would seem that 
he did not expect to succeed. On Wednesday 
the eighteenth, the wind moderated and gave us 
time to patch up our vessel, which had become 
a complete wreck. We exerted ourselves to the 
utmost in splicing, lashing, calking, clearing 
away, mending sails, and other efforts to get 
snug again, at the same time resolving to leave 
the wreck if we should discover a vessel that 
would take us off. At four o'clock, p. m., one 
of our number cried, " Sail, ho ! " from the mast 
head. We soon made lier out to be a ship stand- 
ing nearly in a direction toward us. She headed 
north-east, from which circumstance we sup- 
posed she must be bound to Europe. We set 
our colors in distress, and before dark had the 
satisfaction of seeing her flag hoisted in answer 
to ours. It was so dark that we were not able 
to tell tlie nation to which she appertained. The 
wind being light, the ship did not near us suffi- 
ciently to speak us until seven o'clock. She 
hailed in English, to know what we wanted. 
But we had scarcely time to say a word before 
she was out of hearing distance. Presently a 
boat came near us, with a few men, all speaking 
some unknown tongue. I inquired in English, 
French, and Spanish what countrymen they 
were. They understood me sufficiently to say 



234 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

that they were Swedes. Our mate, who was by 
birth a Swede, immediately commenced speak- 
ing to them in their own language, informing 
them of our condition, and requesting that we 
might be taken off. The boat, which was a 
small one, returned to the ship, the steersman 
saying that he would return with a larger one, 
and take us all off with our baggage. As the 
wind began to rise, and it became cloudy and 
rainy, we doubted whether we should ever see a 
boat again. We packed up, however, and made 
ready to leave. At ten o'clock we heard voices, 
and presently saw a boat approaching. The 
mate of the ship commanded it, and informed 
us that there was so much sea on that he should 
not be able to board us, but that he would keep 
near us ; and if we would throw our things over- 
board he would pick them up, and if we would 
get into the boat in the same way he would do 
all he could to help us. It was raining in tor- 
rents. We began to give him our baggage, 
tying a rope to the articles and floating them 
astern. 

I had my fears that we might part with our 
effects, and afterwards not be able to get off our- 
selves ; but, notwithstanding, I continued to 
throw over trunk after trunk, both of my own 
and others. Directly the boatman declared that, 
owing to the increasing sea it would not be safe 



ABANDON THE VESSEL. 235 

to take more baggage, and that if we did not 
come then he must go o& and leave us. The 
captain immediately left, and a part of the 
hands slipped down a rope attached to one of 
the davits, and were picked up one by one into 
the boat. The mate was just going, leaving but 
one man and myself behind on deck, and Mad- 
am sitting waiting in the cabin to be called. 
I stopped the mate, insisting that we ought not 
to go until the woman was put into the boat. 
He was a little ashamed, and remained while I 
called up Madam, and, amid her cries and tears, 
dragged her to the taffrail, got h^r poised upon 
it, bent the rope round her waist, seized a mo- 
ment unexpectedly to her and pushed her off, 
holding on to the line, and hanging her up. I 
begged the boatman to show some gallantry on 
such an occasion, and come under with the boat, 
while I stood ready to drop her into it. This 
plan succeeded, and she was safely placed in the 
boat, although there was much danger attending 
it. The rest of us soon followed, leaving on 
deck my writing desk, hat box, valise, and 
clothes bag, containing my cloak, surtout, boots, 
and shoes, some of my bedding, books, papers, 
&c. We were soon ready to push off, but found 
not a little difficulty in clearing the schooner. 
She seemed to make an effort to run over us, 
and we all sent up a shriek of despair as we 



236 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

passed under her bows. By plying the oafs 
briskly, however, we escaped. The ship had 
drifted to a distance of several miles, and it was 
with difficulty that we discovered her light as 
we rose upon the top of the waves. Several 
seas threatened to overwhelm us, breaking into 
the boat, and partly filHng it. At one time we 
hardly dared to hope that we should escape. In- 
deed I did not expect it, and began to sing a 
hymn, which had a calming and soothing influ- 
ence on my mind. All else were in most breath- 
less anxiety. The woman, who supposed herself 
safe when nearing the ship, seized my hand, 
and, believing me to have been the instrument 
of saving her life because I put her into the 
boat, littered a thousand thanks, and made as 
many promises. I told her I believed her a run- 
away, and hoped she would stay in her own 
country and among her own friends should she 
ever get on land again. She told me that she 
ran away in her youth from her relatives, and 
was much surprised that I should have guessed 
the same. After getting on board the ship, 
however, she conducted herself in such a way 
as to make us sure that she would never keep 
her promises, or be made better by her misfor- 
tunes. In making the exchange from boat to 
ship our danger was extreme ; but a kind Prov- 
idence saved us, although the boat was stove in 



DELIVERANCE. 237 

and broken against the sides of the ship. It 
was midnight ; and you may imagine how glad 
the Swedish captain was to see us after three 
hours' trembling for the safety of his boat and 
half the crew of his ship. 

The gale increased ; the ship was hove to un- 
der a mizzen staysail. We were asked below, 
and, cold, wet, and exhausted as I was, I could 
not refuse a glass of brandy which was offered 
to me. The cabin of the Pehrennes not being 
very convenient for the accommodation of new 
comers, and the woman, whom I disliked ex- 
ceedingly, being asked to occupy a part, I re- 
sorted to the hold of the ship, and stretched 
myself upon some sails that lay upon the water 
casks and among the cargo. 

My gratitude was unbounded for the comfort 
which even this situation afforded me, and for 
this deliverance in some of the greatest perils of 
my life. A king on his throne could not have 
been more happy. The ship was bound to New 
York. The distance did not exceed four days' 
sail, and we hoped for a speedy arrival there ; 
but, alas, the sequel will show how vain were 
our expectations ! That night I found sleep far 
from me. In less than two hours I was shaking 
with ague, half frozen, and found myself feeling 
about in the dark hold of a ship, stumbling 
over iron, boxes, and barrels, searching for 



238 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

some wet blankets wliich had been thrown 
down the hatch before we came down, that I 
might cover myself. 

We had supposed the ship stanch and strong ; 
but daylight came, and with it the lifting of the 
hatch, discovering to us an old ship, heavily 
laden with iron, a slow sailer, rather leaky, with 
a poor crew, and altogether making it doubtful 
whether we were going to float much longer for 
changing ships. Inquiries were made of the 
captain, " How many days have you been out ? " 
" Tree monts." " When do you expect to ar- 
rive ? " "I can no tell ; in a few days, I hopes ; 
ven de nord-vesters blows no more. What you 
tink ? " Our captain replied, " You ought to 
get in within ten days." From the observations 
I had made, I replied, " I think you will not 
got in within thirty days;^^ and I made up 
my mind not to expect to arrive under a 
month. 

But my story is getting too long, and it would 
take up too much time and room to tell you how 
we passed the thirty-Jive days which we were 
compelled to remain on board. There were 
some intrigues, some quarrels, and hard feelings. 
There were also some good times at Christmas 
and New Year's. On the whole, the retrospect 
is not so comfortless as one might suppose. 



IN NEW YORK. ,239 

Letter to his sister in K. 

New York, Peb. 10, 1840. 

My Dear Sister : As you have probably re- 
ceived the papers which I mailed for K., you 
are aware of the circumstances which conspired 
to bring me to New York despite my attempts 
to reach the south. I have not been very well 
since I returned from sea, or I should have writ- 
ten you before. 

I have no pleasure in communicating my 
misfortunes. A shipwreck, though, is an every 
day affair in these times, and many have re- 
cently occurred that were more disastrous than 
mine. Indeed, when I contemplate tlie awful 
affair of the Lexington,* my troubles do not 
seem worth mentioning. It is enough, at pres- 
ent, to say, that it pleased God to spare my life, 
and bring me once more safe to land ; and I 
hope you, with my other friends, will unite with 
me in praising him for this deliverance. 

I arrived here on the 21st ult., and have 
since been at the house of brother E., whose 
kindness, together with that of sister A., has 
contributed to make this a very safe and pleas- 
ant harbor to recruit in. I have determined 
not to go to New Orleans this winter. It is now 
so late in the season that there seems but little 

♦ A steamboat burnt on Lonsr Island Sound. 



240 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

inducement, and the voyage itself has few attrac- 
tions after nearly two months drubbing from the 
winds and waves in one of the most stormy 
regions of the Atlantic Ocean. 

My pecuniary loss from my late misfortune, 
I hope, will not exceed three or four hundred 
dollars, and perhaps not so much. The sympa- 
thy which all my friends express for me may be 
said to be worth more than that ; so that I have 
cause for much gratitude. Our brothers at New 
Haven have sent me a very pressing invitation 
to stop with them until I have concluded what 
to do again. Brother E. here is equally kind, 
and I do believe that I am getting more of the 
family affections than belong to me. The com- 
mercial and financial difficulties of the land do 
not abate in the least. 

Thousands, who a few months since lived in 
the greatest style of affluence, have been reduced 
to poverty, and must leave the metropolis for the 
fields, to gain a living by the sweat of their brow. 
It would seem as if the Lord had entered the 
temple and again overthrown the tables of the 
money-changers, and many have fled in confu- 
sion. If I may predict, it will yet take some 
time to purify the corrupt fountains, and restore 
healthy action to the mercantile body. 

With love to your dear family, I remain your 
affectionate brother. 



PREPARATIONS FOR MARRIAGE. 241 

In May of this year Mr. Blake made a short 
visit to Washington, and then laid his plans for 
another voyage to South America. 

On the 12th of June, he wrote his sister, how- 
ever, in K., that it was his intention to be 
married before he left, and that he had made 
choice for a companion of Miss Elizabeth Dyer, 
of Truro, Mass., a daughter of an old acquaint- 
ance and friend. 

To show how religion influenced his whole 
life, and would determine his course in his do- 
mestic relations, the following extract is given 
from a letter to his intended wife : — 

Boston, June 7. 
What could be more inconsistent than that 
we, who have been redeemed by Christ's precious 
blood, should refuse to be known as his children ? 
Nothing, surely. Let others do as they will, for 
us, we will serve the Lord. May God grant that 
we may ever honor and obey him in our daily 
walk and conversation. What hopes and prom- 
ises are revealed to us in the gospel ! Shall we 
be partakers of the benefit ? Oh, yes ; if true 
believers, we certainly shall. Let us strive to 
begin well, that we may expect to end well. 
How trifling and insignificant do the things of 
this life appear when we compare them with 
16 



242 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

spiritual and eternal objects ! Let us never for- 
get that we have here no abiding place ; that we 
are strangers and pilgrims ; that this world is 
not our home ; that we seek a city which hath 
foundations, whose builder and maker is God. 

A further extract from the same letter, gives 
an interesting example of his manner when trav- 
eling : — * 

I was much pleased at finding the crew and 
the most of the people on board the small vessel 
in which I came up from the Cape, Christians. 
They appeared to be consistent, and were united 
like brothers. I dare say that their little cabin 
in the forward part of the boat has often been 
used in social worship, and that in following their 
humble occupation as fishermen, when the sea 
has roared and foamed around them, their glad 
voices have been heard above the blast, ascend- 
ing to the praise of the great Creator. I had 
much conversation with the " skipper." He in- 
troduced the subject, and it did my heart good 
to find one, however humble, who hesitated not 
to declare that he was not ashamed of the gospel 
of Christ. I wished him God-speed ; and since I 
arrived on shore, I have felt it a duty and a 
privilege to commend these mariners to the pro- 



MARRIAGE. 243 

tection and blessing of Heaven. They treated 
me kindly and hospitably, for which I was 
grateful. 

Mr. B. was married on the SOtli of June, and 
immediately prepared to sail again for Buenos 
Ay res. 



244 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER XY. 



Journal of Third and Last Voyage to Buenos Ayrea. — Communica- 
tion to Boston Recorder. — North and South America contrasted. 
— Letter to his youngest Sister. — French Infidelity. — Letter 
from the « Pampas." 



During the voyage a journal was kept jointly 
by the wedded pair, at the request of their friends 
on the Cape, to whom it was addressed ; some 
extracts from this will be given. 

July 11, 1840. 

Sailed from Boston, bound to the River Plate. 
Nothing remarkable occurred, aside from the 
painful separation from friends, home, and 
country. 

July 17. 

A very pleasant day. We were pleased to 
find that our commander. Captain D., is not 
only one of the most affable and obliging men of 
his profession, but one of the most intelligent 
and experienced. He has been several voyages 
to the East Indies ; and besides being acquainted 
with many of our missionaries and other benevo- 



THE KING OF SI AM. 245 

lent men in those regions, he is well informed 
in regard to the manners, customs, religion, and 
wants of the natives. He has had the honor of 
conveying several eminent missionaries abroad ; 
performing the service acceptably to them and 
to the Board which sent them. Mr, Gutzlaff, so 
well known in connection with missionary oper- 
ations in China, was once a passenger with him 
from Singapore to Bangkok, in Siam ; and sub- 
sequently the captain was sick for several weeks 
at the house, and under the medical care of Mr. 
Gutzlaff. Last evening he told us of an inter- 
view, which, in company with Mr. G., he once 
had with the king of Siam. They had a special 
invitation to go to the royal palace, and found 
the king seated on his golden throne, ready to 
receive them. After being presented, his maj- 
esty made, among others, the following inquiries 
of Capt. D. : " How far is it to America ? " " Is 
the river by which you go crooked, or straight ? " 
" What are your cables made. of ? " " Are your 
anchors wood? " " How many times do you have 
to drop them on the voyage ? " " How deep is the 
water ? " "How do you account for the tides ? " 
To this last question the captain gave the generally 
received opinion in reply. The king laughed at 
Avhat he called his ignorance, and out of pity 
deigned to give the true reason for the rising and 
falling of the waters. " There is," said he, " at 



246 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

the mouth of the river, an immense tortoise, which 
draws in the waters, making them retire, and lets 
them out again for the flow. This is the true 
theory ! " adding, " Now, sir, since in this you 
are so greatly mistaken, and evidently know so 
little, how can I believe that you have answered 
my other questions correctly? You may go, 
now: " — thus breaking up the interview. 

Friday, July 31. 

It is now just one calendar month since a 
wedding occurred upon the Cape, in which the 
writers of this journal were the parties most im- 
mediately interested. The time has hurried 
away, and yet it has taken us over twelve hun- 
dred miles from home ; and here, upon the wide 
ocean, we commence a new month, with bright 
skies, unclouded horizon, and a propitious gale 
gently bearing us on to our destined haven. 
Still we look forward ; and so will it probably 
be through life ; and so, we trust, in death. The 
present is indeed but a pilgrimage ; and the 
future alone is our home ! We thank God that 
in our fondest anticipations our eyes are fixed 
upon the same objects, our hopes and aims are 
one ; and being united here, we rejoice in the 
prospect of perpetuating that union in a world 
without end. 



THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 247 

Aug. 29. 

For the last ten days we have been passing 
over that unpleasant part of a voyage to the 
southern hemisphere, lying between the N. E. 
and S. E. trade winds, embracing about eight 
degrees of latitude, where squalls, calms, rain, 
heavy swells, and rolling seas are the prevailing 
objects of solicitude, and, of course, the prevail- 
ing subjects of conversation. 

Sept. 1. 

This is our first day in the southern hemi- 
sphere. We crossed the equator last evening. 
The roughness of the sea has for some time 
prevented our editress from performing the 
duties she owes to this journal, and, in order 
that our readers may keep up with our prog- 
ress, the present writer has to act a more con- 
spicuous part than he could otherwise wish. 
We have been looking for the first appearance 
of that beautiful constellation, the " Southern 
Cross ; " but it has not yet come above the 
horizon. It is said that the Papists, who voyage 
to the southern hemisphere, when first seeing 
it, fall down to it, and worship it as an emblem 
of their faith. We would be guilty of no such 
breach of the second commandment ; yet the 
sight of the cross may properly lead us to seri- 
ous reflections. My Redeemer met death upon 
the cross. Behold, my soul, the emblem of his 



248 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

torture ! Think of him hanging upon the tree. 
Hear his last words — proof of unquenchable 
love to men : " Father, forgive them, for thej 
know not what they do ; " and shall I not take 
up my cross at his bidding ? Behold the multi- 
tude for whom he died, who have this image 
constantly before them, on their churches, their 
market houses, in their dwellings, and on their 
persons, and yet his sacred name many of them 
constantly use in anger or in jest. Does this 
cross remind them of him to any good purpose ? 
What can I do for them ? 

Lat. 9° S., Sept. 5. 

To-day concludes just eight weeks since we 
left Boston. Time flies, whether passed in 
pleasure or pain. Our lives wear away, if our 
voyage does not. 

No grumbling, (to use a word well understood 
by sailors,) is allowed on board the ship ; but 
the rule only extends to fault-finding with re- 
gard to man and his works. If the wind is not 
fair, all may complain of that. If clouds ob- 
scure the rays of the sun, all may show dissat- 
isfaction, and no one take offense. I said no 
one ; but is there not One who has a right to be 
offended ? 

Sunday, Sept. 6. 

Have been reading the Life of Harlan 
Page — a life worthy of the imitation of every 



SABBATH AT SEA. 249 

Christian. What encouragement does his suc- 
cess afford to those who pray and labor in the 
vineyard of the Lord! Every one certainly 
must desire as happy a death as Harlan Page 
had ; but how few will earn the short, but well- 
deserved tribute upon his grave stone : " He 
ceased not to warn every one night and day with 
tears." 

Sept. 19. 

To-day is the seventieth since leaving Boston. 
" When shall we arrive ? " is now every day 
asked. 

Sabbath, 20th. 

We are to-day in the latitude of Cape St. 
Mary — the northern side of the great Rio de 
la Plata. The water begins to assume a green 
color — an indication that we are sailing over 
soundings, which extend off to the eastward of 
the river. Weather very fine ; thermometer at 
75°. The sea remarkably smooth, with a light 
breeze from the south. 

Aside from our isolated situation in respect to 
the religious world, we could not have a pleas- 
anter Sabbath. We have religious books, peace 
of mind, and retirement ; grateful hearts, and 
in our own snug state room we may worship God 
according to the dictates of our consciences, with 
none to molest or make us afraid. We should, 
indeed, be additionally gratified if there could 



250 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

be an assembly each day of all our little num- 
ber, who, cast upon the sea with us, share 
the same perils, need the same protection, have 
the same God, and should have the same desire 
to praise him. How appropriate is a united 
service to our great Benefactor and Preserver ! 

In the smaller tasks pertaining to the voyage, 
taking in sail or preparing for a storm, all are 
willing to lend a hand. The topsails are hoisted 
by united strength, and they go up with alacrity 
at the song of the boatswain. But how is it in 
those things that pertain to the soul's interests ? 
The storm of God's wrath, to be revealed upon 
the impenitent, approaches. The solemn and 
fearful shores of eternity are under our lee. 
The tempest thickens, and dangers are on every 
side ; our sails are unprepared, our ship unpro- 
vided for the struggle, our souls unsheltered 
and near to sinking ; yet there is no voice of a 
captain to rally all hands to strive against the 
inevitable destruction ! Thanks be to God there 
are some masters of ships who do not utterly 
neglect these things ; but there are others who, 
though they profess to feel the importance of 
them, exert no favorable religious influence on 
the crew. Not even a Sunday service is held ; 
and why ? Let me record the reasons given by 
three professedly pious shipmasters, who have 
been asked. One said he never prayed with 



WHY SHIPMASTERS NEGLECT KELIGION. 251 

or exhorted his crew because they would make 
a mock of him afterwards in the forecastle. 

Another said he never read, prayed, or ex- 
horted with his men, because it would be im- 
possible to maintain good discipline if he did ; 
that sailors would take advantage of Christian, 
brotherly kindness toward them on the part of 
officers ; that mutinies and insubordination would 
be the consequence ; and, therefore, he never 
would labor religiously with them. 

And still another, who made none of these 
objections, said it was impossible to be consistent 
as a Christian before his men, and therefore in 
praying with them he should profess himself to 
be more holy than he was, and his inconsis- 
tencies would reproach religion and scandalize 
its pure doctrines ! Similar reasons were given 
for not raising the Bethel flag, and inviting 
preaching on board when in port. Will such 
reasons stand in the judgment ? Did the first 
count the cost, when he professed Christianity ? 
Is he not ashamed of Jesus and of his cross ? 
Did the second ever consider that Christianity 
acted out is not only compatible with good gov- 
ernment, but that it is its very foundation ? 
Witness Christian states. The more the Bible 
and its precepts are inculcated and obeyed, the 
more peace, the more happiness. Let him learn 
what Christianity is. How long will the third 



252 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

keep his light under a bushel ? Nay, is not his 
light darkness ? Did he ever see the light ? 
Are such persons in a way to receive the glori- 
ous welcome, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant " ? 

This " journal of the voyage " was closed with 
the following entry, and thus sent to friends to 
whom it was addressed : — 

Monte Video, Oct. 21, 1840. 

The writer is desirous of adding his testimony 
to the goodness of God in having brought us to 
this place in safety, where we arrived about a 
month since, having been at sea seventy-three 
days. Some of our friends made haste to meet 
us before our vessel had furled her sails, and 
would have us remove immediately on shore and 
take up our lodgings with them. Our quarters 
are more comfortable than we could have ex- 
pected from the present state of the city, which 
may be said to have doubled its population with- 
in two years, without having added one fifth to 
its number of houses. Every dwelling swarms 
with people. Boarding and coffee houses are 
overrun, and many new comers are obliged to 
live on board the ships. The harbor is crowded 
with vessels, waiting with anxiety the removal 
of the blockade of Buenos Ayres by the French 



BLOCKADE OP BUENOS AYRES. 253 

fleet, which has now lasted two and a half 
years. Most of our countrymen here expect 
to go up to the city when it is raised — some to 
reside for a term of years, and we among the 
number. 

A new admiral, empowered to settle the diffi- 
culties between France and the Argentine Re- 
public, has arrived and proceeded up the river. 
Much is expected from his visit, and good news 
is every moment looked for. The tyrant, 
Rosas, continues his government at Buenos 
Ayres as despotic as ever. He is spilling much 
blood, we hear ; and some of it flows, we are 
sorry to learn, from some of the best of his fel- 
low-citizens. War surrounds us, yet we, our- 
selves, are undisturbed, for which we thank 
God. 

We find a letter from Mr. B. to his father, in 
which he expresses great regret that unavoidable 
circumstances prevented them from seeing him 
before they left the United States. After an 
account of their voyage, he adds, " We hope that 
amid your trials and troubles, arising from fee- 
ble health and the decline of life, your views of 
the promised land are bright and cheering. The 
longer I live, the greater privilege I find it to be 
a follower of the Saviour ; and how consoHng to 
know that those whom we love on earth are the 



254 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

subjects of the same divine grace, and will finally 
dwell with us in heaven ! How short will be the 
intervening time between this and the final rest 
of all our loved ones, who hope in the great sal- 
vation ! How much to encourage us in the 
promises ! Hardly a leaf of God's book but re- 
veals one or more. No doubt you resort to them 
as to a light shining in a dark place. To one 
who has so long beUeved and rejoiced in them 
there is little for me to say.'' 

The news of the raising of the blockade hav- 
ing arrived at Monte Video, Mr. Blake immedi- 
ately repaired to Buenos Ayres, leaving his wife 
to come with some friends as soon as prepara- 
tions for living could be ma^e. During his 
residence at that time, in South America, he 
occasionally wrote communications for the " Bos- 
ton Recorder." These letters are interesting, as 
throwing light on the state of that distracted 
country. Occasionally some extracts will be 
made from these articles. They may help us to 
estimate the moral courage requisite to maintain 
a Christian life in such a community. They 
show also Mr. Blake's character as a Christian 
citizen, and his strong desires for the best inter- 
ests of the people. 

The following is from the Recorder of April 9, 
1841: — 



THE BLOCKADE RAISED, 255 

SOUTH AMERICA. 

BuExos Ayres, Dec. 1, 1841. 

I wrote you last from Monte Video ; and now 
address you from the ancient metropolitan city 
of the Viceroys, at present the capital of the 
Argentine Confederated Provinces. After suffer- 
ing more than two and a half years of blockade, 
Buenos Ayres has recently been again thrown 
open to commerce. I landed but a few days 
since, in the midst of rejoicings at the reconcilia- 
tion of the government with the French, the con- 
sequent withdrawal of the fleet of the latter, and 
the reestablishment of a free and friendly inter- 
course with other nations. 

The city presented quite a lively appearance 
upon the occasion, owing to the number of flags 
displayed, and other similar demonstrations of 
joy. Red being the favorite color of the govern- 
ment party, it is exhibited on gala and. other 
days, by every one in some article of dress, as a 
sign of fidelity to the administration. Indeed, 
so far is party spirit carried, that no citizen is 
considered safe without a badge of this sort. A 
scarlet ribbon upon each hat bears a motto, im- 
precating death upon the members of the oppos- 
ing faction. After one or two weeks of terror 
and indescribable suffering, the city has become 
tranquil and safe. The elements of political 



256 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

dissension are not, however, entirely settled, and 
there can plainly be discovered in the faces of 
the inhabitants an anxiety in regard to the fu- 
ture. Two opposing armies in the interior are 
still contending for the mastery, and conflicting 
reports are daily reaching us of their doings. 

The North American, fresh from the home of 
his youth, can not but make comparisons between 
his own land and the South American States. 
And among our countrymen here, it is a common 
inquiry, " When will these wars and bickerings 
cease among the people of South America ? " 

Speaking of the difference in the character of 
the people in the North American States, he 
adds, " For my own part, in accounting for this 
difference, I think the character of the ancestry, 
and the origin of the two nations, is to be con- 
sidered. I have often contrasted in my mind 
the poor, persecuted, but persevering and en- 
lightened Puritan and Huguenot, escaping with 
difficulty from his fatherland, crossing the At- 
lantic in the little Mayflower, or one of her 
consorts, seeking on an inhospitable coast a place 
to worship God, with the rich, pompous, royal- 
chartered adventurer, laden with implements of 
warfare, accompanied, perhaps, by a priest as 
avaricious as himself, hastening to the New 
World in some invincible vessel, to plunder and 



SOUTH AMERICA WITHOUT THE BIBLE. 257 

destroy ; to enrich himself still more, and offer 
up incense at the shrine of Mammon. The one 
seeks to perpetuate truth, the other to accumu- 
late treasure. The one bears with him, as his 
greatest prize, the Book of books, the law of God ; 
his study by day, his pillow by night, his guide 
in prosperity, his support in adversity; and, 
dying in the wilderness, rejoices to leave so rich 
a legacy to his children. The other cares not 
for books or laws of divine origin, but marching 
over the blood and ruins of his fellow-men, 
secures his sordid wish and dies, leaving his gold, 
his weapons, and his priest. The descendants of 
one, with the Bible, have become rich, powerful, 
happy. The rich mines of Peru and Bolivia, 
loithout the Bible, have left the descendants of 
the other poor, quarrelsome, and unhap|)y. I 
am sorry to say that among the common people 
of this country, so far as I can learn, the Bible is 
still unknown, except perhaps from a few vulgar 
stories, which the priests have distorted from 
some of its pages. Tlie Bible, with God's bless- 
ing to give the people its spirit, would certainly 
give to South America a moral, and may I not 
say also, o. political regeneration." 

The nest date we find is in a letter to his 
sister, dated February 8, 1841. After stating 
that they were detained at Monte Video two 
17 



258 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT, 

months, waiting for the raising of the blockade, 
he adds, " We are finally settled here, boarding 
with a friend of ours, enjoying life perhaps as 
well as we ever did or ever shall. The cares of 
business have almost absorbed my attention ; but 
still, my dear sister, the bright place above is 
not kept out of sight; and I thank God there are 
seasons of breathing in a purer atmosphere than 
is found in merely worldly occupations. We 
think of you often, and while cold winds whistle 
about your snug cottage, we wish you could 
come and see us, and get some peaches, which 
are now very abundant. We go a blackberry- 
ing, too, and it is no uncommon thing to* bring 
heme from four to six quarts. But Nature will 
soon empty her horn on your side, and while we 
resign our peaches, grapes, figs, and oranges, 
your fields will be sprinkled with good things. 
So we go, taking turns. Oh, may we not fail to 
share as well in spiritual blessings. In these you 
have had a harvest; but, alas! here, winter 
still reigns. When you pray, remember us and 
this community. 

Your affectionate brother and sister. 

From the Boston Recorder : — 

Buenos Ayres, Feb. 15, 1841. 

The South Americans, in general, are not 
wanting in intelligence or enterprise, as their 



SOUTH AMERICAN CHARACTER. 259 

long, persevering, and finally successful struggle 
for national independence will testify. I speak 
more particularly of those of this republic, when 
I say that they are bold, generous, full of hopes, 
worshipers of^ liberty; and all their civil wars, 
domestic feuds, revolutions, and massacres are 
undertaken and carried on in her name and for 
her sake. But, like the gaudy image of the 
Yirgin, which is borne about their streets decked 
with tinsel and flowers, their liberty is but an 
image ^ equally deaf to their prayers, and about 
as unlike the reality. 

Their religion, although it bears the name of 
Christian, seems but a system of idolatry. Their 
churches are full of wooden saints in various 
positions, shapes, and forms, to which every one 
who passes must prostrate himself, make the 
sign of the cross, or bow m reverence. And 
while the zealous devotee will even raise his hat 
on passing a church, it is disgusting to hear his 
profane manner of speaking on the most common 
topics of conversation. A lady would consider 
it an omission not to be overlooked, if she did 
not exclaim " Jesus ! " at every time of sneezing ; 
and every child who is old enough to speak, is 
accustomed to use the name on similar occa- 
sions, and also as an expression of surprise. 
During a walk one morning, tlie bracing nature 
of the atmosphere caused me a fit of sneezing; 



260 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

upon which a black boy, who was following me, 
and noticed my omission, repeated each time 
this exclamation for me. 

Since the revolution a species of French in- 
fidelity has gained ground among the male pop- 
ulation ; and under the present administration, 
(which requires at least an outward show of re- 
spect for religion from every citizen,) it is not dif- 
ficult to perceive that many who strictly observe 
its routine are in heart really ashamed of it, and 
tired of its ceremonies. In consequence of the 
interruption of direct commerce with Spain, on 
throwing off the yoke of the mother country, 
French works, in the Spanish translations, were 
abundantly supplied. Perhaps this arose from 
the avarice of French booksellers, but mor« 
likely from the zeal of political agitators and ultra 
reformers in France. Whatever the cause may 
have been, French philosophy, French infidelity, 
and its accompanying ideas of liberty^ poured in 
like a flood, and were easily drunk up by a young 
people thirsting for new ideas, and anxious to 
get rid of old notions. These wrought great 
changes, both in religion and politics, breaking 
up some of the strongest foundations of society. 
The difficulties of the English language in part, 
probably, formed a barrier to the advancement 
of English literature in the Spanish American 
republics. 



IGNORANCE OP TRUE LIBERTY. 261 

As yet the English and American press have 
scarcely produced any effect upon these coun- 
tries. It is true they know something of the 
United States, of our form of government and 
revolutions, and in some respects our institu- 
tions have served as models for theirs ; but their 
views have mostly been derived through French 
works, or translations with French notes, and 
French perversions, and, of course, must be 
very imperfect. Their attempts to imitate us 
have always failed ; and it is now common to 
hear their wisest and best men declare, it is 
preposterous and foolish to think of it again. 

In justice to the philanthropists of both Eng- 
land and the United States I am bound to say, 
that copies of the Bible have been sent here in 
the language of the people from both countries ; 
but the priests discountenance the reading of it, 
and the people generally have a prejudice against 
it. How can it be otherwise ? Many, indeed, 
are willing to find a more excellent way, but are 
afraid to seek it by breaking in upon the tradi- 
tions of the church and the commands of the 
priests. When, then, shall we look for reform, 
and how shall the simple truths of the Bible 
reach the millions of Peru, Colombia, Chili, and 
of the Argentine Republic ? and how shall the 
people obtain that liberty wherewith Christ 
makes his people free? 



262 THE YOUNG CHEISTIAN MERCHANT. 

In a letter to his sister in K., of April 22, 
after stating that he was " about to join a mer- 
cantile house in B. A.," that " his business was 
urgent," and that his wife was spending a little 
time in the country, where he should soon join 
her for a few days, Mr. B. says, — 

" I am seated alone in my room. It is even- 
ing; nine has struck. Your letter lies open 
before me, and in silence claims my token of 
reciprocity, which, with pleasure, I write out for 
you. I appreciate your sympathy for our long, 
tedious passage. You inquire, ' How could you 
have endured it had you not been married ? ' 
Eather a landish question. A sailor would have 
asked the question the other way. Without a 
very good wife, or rather with an indifferent one, 
it would have been tedious indeed. As it was, 
I got along nearly as well as if I had been 
alone. We board at present, and are pleasantly 
situated for the winter just commencing. We 
have a field here to do good, and I consider this 
our great business. Worldly prospects are flat- 
tering at present, but past disappointments have 
made me cautious, and I have no confidence — 
no, not even in princes. This country is still 
engaged in civil war ; but in and near the city 
we enjoy tranquillity and peace, for which I am 
truly thankful." 



A FARMER ON THE PAMPAS. 263 

To his brother, E. W. B., New Haven, Ct. 

Canada de la paja, 
Province Buenos Ayres, April 28. 

Dear Brother : I received your letter of a 
few da3''s since, and, being in the country pass- 
ing a leisure week, I improve it to reply. You 
may be interested in a description of our sit- 
uation and the surrounding objects. It is night; 
the rain is pelting the thatched roof over our 
heads, and thunder and lightning are playing 
majestically in the clouds that overhang the 
pampas. The rancho (as a cottage with mud 
walls in this country is called) is about thirty 
miles W. S. W. from Buenos Ayres, on the 
bosom of the great steppes of this part of South 
America. It belongs to a countryman of ours, 

formerly of C. , Penn., a well-educated man, 

married to a good Englisliwoman. He is now 
an estanciero, or farmer, or, more properly, a 
raiser of cattle. His humble dwelling is a very 
good one for the country, and North American 
ingenuity has contrived to make it more comfort- 
able than those of some of his richer neighbors. 
It stands in a square of ground enclosed by a 
slight, peach-wood fence, the adjacent land suf- 
ficiently inclined to lead the falling rain from the 
house. His family consists of his wife and two 
children ; while in another rancho, which stands 
a few feet from this, live two Englishmen, one 



264 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

American, and one native boy, hired laborers, 
besides a half score of women servants, with 
their children and families, generally of the 
yellow and mixed Indian cast, whose numbers 
have been augmented by others, refugees, whose 
huts have been burned or destroyed during the 
recent revolution. In front and near, under 
our windows, sleep about a dozen large dogs, 
faithful monitors in approaching danger. Around 
the enclosure tliere nightly rest from twelve to 
fifteen thousand sheep, two thousand head of 
neat cattle, thirty to forty horses, a dozen hogs, 
fifty to sixty geese, four or five domesticated 
ostriches, and hens and chickens ad infinitum. 
While I write, the bleating of the sheep and the 
lowing of the cattle constitute the chief music, 
and indeed cease not to give shape to our 
dreams through the night. During a heavy 
storm like the present there is but little rest for 
the shepherds, who are obliged to keep the 
slieep from wandering from their usual standing 
places. The wind, rain, and lightning often 
frights them away, and they must as frequently 
be driven back. By day they go out to feed 
upon the broad expanse, four or five thousand 
in each flock, and each under the care of its 
shepherd, who is always mounted on horseback, 
and whose duty it is to see that his flock does 
not mix with others, and are on good pasture, 



PASTORAL LIFE. 265 

and to turn them back again when they are 
wandering too far. 

Our host finds his increase so great that he is 
now contriving boilers to try up his " capones " 
or wethers, for the tallow and grease, hoping in 
this way to realize something for them, — tallow 
being more salable than live animals. He 
clips annually about thirty thousand poimds of 
wool, which, being mostly from choice sheep, 
brings generally from five to eight cents per 
pound ; but less this year, the prices of wool 
being remarkably low. 

Previous to the late revolution our hostess had 
a dairy, with the milk of from one hundred to 
one hundred and fifty cows daily ; but the dis- 
turbances compelled her to flee into town, and, 
having been robbed of most of the fixtures, she 
has not yet commenced again. 

The whole country is at present in a very sor- 
rowful state, owing to the exactions of govern- 
ment for men and horses, almost every effective 
man and horse being taken for the public ser- 
vice. Perhaps you and sister may ask how we 
like a pastoral life in South America ? For a 
few weeks it does very well. There is some- 
thing grand in the sight of the flocks and herds 
which browse over the plains ; something agree- 
able in mounting a spirited horse and galloping 
around for leagues, without finding fences or 



266 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

obstructions ; chasing the wild deer and ostrich, 
and returning to feed from your own hand the 
same classes of wild animals domesticated, and 
walking about in peace among your dogs and 
fowls. The day glides away in healthful ex- 
ercises and sports ; but night brings almost any 
thing but quiet. The country, or, as foreigners 
call it, " the camp," is infested with robbers, 
who prowl about to murder and steal. Our 
present landlord, some years since, received one 
of these nocturnal visits, and, after a dozen 
stabs, was left for dead. His wife fared about 
as badly; but they both lived to mourn the 
loss of all their valuables. They have since re- 
covered from their losses, and are now in good 
circumstances. In the last revolution their 
house was again robbed, and one of their most 
faithful men killed. This was about six months 
ago ; and since we have been here there have 
been two or three alarms, but nothing has been 
seen to frighten us. We have, however, thought 
it prudent to keep some muskets, pistols, and 
lances in readiness. I have been surprised to 
find how soon, and with what composure, I 
could handle a cocked pistol, and lie down 
calmly with more than one upon my pillow, 
prepared for a warning from the dogs at any 
instant. On the whole I think I can slumber 
as sweetly on the pampas of South America as 
in a steamboat on the waters of the Mississippi. 



LETTERS. 267 



CHAPTER XYI. 



Letter to Brother in New York. — To Twin Brother.— Letters to 
Editor of Boston Recorder. — To Mr. and Mrs. B., of Han- 
cock, N. H. — Letters to Father and Sister.— To his Wife from 
Monte Video. — To Twin Brother. — To Boston Eecord^r. — To 
his Brother-in-Law in Hancock.— Last Letter to his Father. 



Letter to brother in New York. 

Buenos Ayres, May 6, 1841. 

Dear Brother: Political affairs in this 
country look rather gloomy. It is uncertain 
whether we have a speedy settlement of the 
civil war or not. My mind is made up, how- 
ever, to stay here for the present, and give busi- 
ness a fair trial ; do all the good I can as a 
Christian, and if the Lord preserves me to go 
home with a competence, then I shall have to 
thank him. Life is too uncertain to be project- 
ing much for the future, and I pray God to 
save me from too much worldly care and anx- 
iety. To be able to throw off mortality is a 
great item in our list of duties ; and it becomes 
us, sojourners, to hold things with a feeble 
grasp, and to be constantly looking for a foot- 
hold on the other side of Jordan. Perhaps the 



268 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

state of your health and the pressure of your 
business may lead you to similar reflections ; 
if so, you need no stirring up by the statement 
of mine. 

In a letter to his twin brother, of June 8, he 
says, — 

" My business prospects are as good as when 
I left the United States ; and if I do not get 
rich, I hope, by industry and perseverance, to 
make a good living. I have lately formed a 
partnership, which you will see advertised in the 
papers I send you. We do a wholesale busi- 
ness in drugs and dyes. We ship to United 
States, and receive and sell consignments of 
ships, goods, and merchandise generally." 

From the Boston Recorder. 

July 26, 1841. 

Buenos Ayres, situated as it is, nearly two 
thousand miles from any maritime port of con- 
sequence, excepting one, is, nevertheless, sup- 
plied with a large portion of foreigners ; and I 
think I do not mistake in estimating them, at 
the present time, as constituting over one sixth 
of the entire population of the city. The most 
of them are Europeans, of different nations and 
complexions ; and, although mixed up in many 
respects with the citizens, yet they form a dis- 



FOREIGNERS IN BUENOS AYRES. 269 

tinct class. Enjoying the protection of their 
respective governments, they are exempt, in 
most cases, from the arbitrary acts of the rulers 
of the country. Thus they escape the more 
immediate troubles arising from revolutions and 
fluctuations in society, and, being left to pur- 
sue their various callings, they have become the 
most industrious and useful of the inhabitants. 
They have done much to establish and foster 
commerce and the mechanic arts, which, previ- 
ous to their coming to the country, scarcely de- 
serve to be named. 

The young South American hardly arrives at 
the age of sixteen when he is forced into the 
army, and from the frequency of civil commo- 
tions and wars, he acquires .the profession of 
arms. This, with his camp habits and notions, 
unfits him for every thing else, and he is, in time 
of peace, liable to become a drone in society ; or 
he may be worse, as he can only live by foment- 
ing civil discord, and, if of an aspiring disposi- 
tion, he seeks to satisfy his ambition by becom- 
ing the chief of a faction. The foreigner, then, 
who brings his industry, his implements, and his 
knowledge, and plies them in such a land as 
this, must be welcome, because he provides for 
the wants of a people who can not or will not 
provide for themselves. Such being the case, 
it is not difficult to foresee that foreigners, or 



270 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT/ 

their descendants, are destined to exert a great 
and growing influence here. To estimate the 
amount of this influence, so far as it may be 
moral or religious, it is necessary to divide for- 
eigners into two distinct classes. First, and 
largest, those from Eoman Catholic countries. 
These bring with them the same faith, the same 
traditions and idle ceremonies of the people, and 
do but add to the mass of corruption they find. 
Tiie second class, (those from Protestant coun- 
tries,) are made up of English, Germans, and 
North Americans. Were it not for these, and 
and the few remains of Puritan principles which 
are found among them, for myself, as far as 
means are concerned, I could see no hope for 
South America, or. for any of her provinces. In 
these countries the English are the most numer- 
ous among all the Protestants; and from the 
extensive power of their government, strength 
of their naval- force, importance of their com- 
merce, and advantageous terms of their treaties, 
they are the most respected. British ministers 
are at every court, consuls, with large salaries, 
at every port. In all their treaties they stip- 
ulate for right to build chapels, to have preach- 
ing, to open schools in their own language, and 
to have cemeteries for their dead. In building 
their churches and supporting their chaplains, 
the home government pays from the national 



FOREIGNERS IN BUENOS AYRES. 271 

treasury an amount equal to that raised by sub- 
scription or otherwise by their countrymen abroad. 
But with all this train of favorable circum- 
stances it is no secret that the English, as a 
body, have exerted no favorable Protestant influ- 
ence on the people of this continent. If the 
English church abroad is not adapted to attract 
the attention of the native population, where 
the people are Papists, it might be supposed 
that it would form a center for Protestant union 
and action ; but even this is not the case, for it 
is so national in its character and spirit as al- 
most to exclude all who belong to other coun- 
tries. It is a great advantage to our country- 
men abroad, when moved to assemble for reli- 
gious purposes, that they are free from metro- 
politan yokes, a national church, and a national 
religion. North Americans in South America 
form a considerable part of the Protestant pop- 
ulation, and where there are sufficient numbers 
collected to support Protestant preaching, in the 
Congregational form or otherwise, it is all-im- 
portant that they move others to join them and 
establish places of worship ; not only to encour- 
age and assist each other, but that they may 
rear their children in the ways of their fathers, 
and be a light to those who sit in darkness and 
in the region of the shadow of death. It be- 
hooves them to be active and stirring. Let 



272 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

every one who goes abroad preach in his life, as 
he goes, the gospel to the sailor or his fellow- 
traveler. When he meets on foreign shores a 
little flock struggling amid a crooked and per- 
verse generation to keep the flame of the gospel 
burning, let him cast in his lot and his mite 
with theirs, and God will bless him and them. 
I am often led to exclaim. What a privilege to 
be an American! But I remember that with 
this privilege there are corresponding responsi- 
bilities. Oh that all my countrymen abroad 
would feel them ! 

Letter to Mr. and Mrs. B., of Hancock, N. H. 

Aug. 28. 

My Dear Brother and Sister : Your letter 
of May 25 was received a few days since. You 
say sister's health is feeble. This awakens my 
sympathy anew; and my first impulse is to 
wish it in my power to assist, comfort, and cheer 
her in the trials of sickness and suffering. But 
the expression of my sorrow, perhaps, may not 
reach you, although borne by the fleeting winds, 
until her pains may be over, or her sufferings 
ended. My next impulse is to betake myself to 
prayer, which may move at once the hand that 
moves the world. May God bless and keep you 
both and your young family. Mr. B. seems to 
imagine us as dwelling in Sodom or Gomorrah, 



PROPOSED ACADEMY. 273 

but the case is not so bad as that. There are 
righteous men enough to save the city, notwith- 
standing all its wickedness. Here is a wide 
field for usefulness, and as this is one motive for 
occupying it, I trust you will not think of me 
as wasting my time or talents in useless efforts, 
or in unavailing labors. The sacrifices to be 
made here by the Christian in the sphere of duty, 
are something more than the blood of bulls and 
of goats ; and when the Lord gives us grace to 
make them, we have the sweet consolation of 
knowing from his presence that they are more 
acceptable. 

The drafts on my time for benevolent pur- 
poses are large, but I trust the time is not spent 
in vain. I am at pr^ent one of the movers in 
establishing a Union Academy here, for giving a 
pretty thorough English education, also teaching 
the Latin, Greek, and other languages, and 
carrying the higher classes through part of a 
collegiate course. It is designed more particu- 
larly for the children of foreigners, but Avith a 
view ultimately to extend its advantages to the 
the native population, and to give them some 
idea of Protestantism. The Methodist Episcopal 
Church Missionary Society will have the man- 
agement of the religious part of it. 
18 



274 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MEECHANT. 

To his sister in N. R. : — 

Buenos Ayres, Nov. 28. 

My Dear Sister: We have just heard the 
melancholy tidings from Hancock. And is it 
so, that our beloved sister is no more ! I can 
hardly realize the painful truth. She has in- 
deed gone before us, and rests from her labors, 
and waits for us to meet her in glory ! What a 
consolation that we know she loved and trusted 
in our divine Master. Let us do what we can, 
by acts of kindness to her children, to make up 
this severe loss to them and to her husband; 
and, emulating her virtues — which were not 
few — look forward to a happy meeting in heaven. 
I will not grieve. The Lord has taken her. 
Blessed be his name ! '' 

I do feel intensely for her afflicted family, and 
I am ready to ask, What can I do for them? 
I pray that this afflictive dispensation may be 
improved by us, and I invoke the protection and 
blessing of Heaven on the motherless little ones. 

To his sister in Keene : — 

Buenos Ayres, Feb. 7, 1841. 

This event [the death of the sister above 
mentioned] is calculated to make me feel both 
the pain and inconvenience of residing abroad. 
While I was reading a letter from her, which she 
wrote a few weeks previous to her decease, she 



A MOORISH HOUSE. "275 

was reposing in the cold ground, and I knew it 
not. So uncertain is our existence. Perhaps, 
ere these lines reach you, the hand that traces 
them may be stiffened in death, and the tongue 
that would utter them be silent in the tomb ! 
But the soul^ blessed be God, lives for ever ! 
The world is not then so dark as it might be, 
nor bereavements so melancholy. Friends may 
be separated by distance, and may be parted by 
death, but it is but for a moment ; and how short 
and trifling will it appear in retrospect from the 
happy land ! 

You ask me to give you a picture of our situ- 
ation and surroundings ; and this I have often 
thought of doing, and as often despaired of 
making intelligible. The truth is, every thing 
is so different from what you have been accus- 
tomed to see that it is almost impossible, without 
the art of a painter, to make you comprehend 
the peculiar construction of a Moorish house. 
Its extent, its large flat roof, its balconies, its 
corridors, its patios or courts, its zaguanes or 
entries, its algibi or cisterns, are things un- 
known in North America. We inhabit one of 
the largest, which contains one court, have a 
patio on the ground, live in the second story, 
have stores under us, and over us a high and 
elevated roof or azotea, upon which we have a 
fine walk, with a view of the river, bay, and 



276 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

shipping. Our house stands upon a corner, and 
fronts on two streets, about eighty feet on one 
end and sixty feet on the other. A dining-room, 
small sitting-room, and sleeping-room, with one 
window to each room, fronting east. A large 
parlor, with three windows, and two sleeping- 
rooms, with one window each, fronting north. 
Inside, we have several smaller rooms — kitchen, 
an extensive corridor with battlements looking 
down into the patio ; and there we have flower- 
pots, containing annual and monthly roses, a 
passion-flower of some years' growth and much 
beauty, several species of the cactus, bocamela, 
diamela, orange trees, geraniums, morning glo- 
ries, ginger root, grape vine, and the like. 

On the opposite side of the street, fronting 
east, rises a massive pile of brick and mortar, 
the church and convent of the Dominican friars. 
The tower is a huge, unshapely structure, bear- 
ing the marks of age, and of the contest with the 
English. When they captured the city, about 
thirty years since, they raised a field-piece into 
the belfry, or tower, and fired it off at the fort, 
until the shock threatened to throw down the 
whole concern. It has about twenty cracked 
and uncracked bells, which, very much to our 
annoyance, ring night and day. About half as 
many friars as bells keep the church, to which 
their perpetual drumming brings a few scatter- 



CARNIVAL — TYRANNY. 277 

ing people. To-day is the second day of the car- 
nival, — one of three in' which people take leave 
of their sins previous to the fasting of Lent. 
The devil is let loose, and all kinds of tricks are 
permitted between the inhabitants of the city. 
Throwing water, sprinkling flour, lime, and saw- 
dust on the heads of people passing, are the most 
common. Indeed, the city is upside down for 
the time. We do not attempt to go into 
the streets from two in the afternoon until 
dark. 

Our autumn has come with its rich fruits. 
The evenings begin to grow long, and now and 
then a bracing morning reminds us of winter. 
How we should enjoy a visit from you. We are 
as comfortable, probably, as we could be in the 
United States. But civil war reigns in the in- 
terior and despotism in town. Our governor, it 
is said, shoots several persons daily to terrify the 
rest and keep them quiet. He succeeds for the 
time, but our hearts bleed for the victims of 
party strife. We may have a revolution soon. 
We hear to-day that the chief of the opposing 
party is fast approaching the city with an 
army. 

The kind sympathy expressed by Mr. Blake 
for his deceased sister's children did not expend 
itself in words. He wrote to their bereaved 



278 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

father, proposing that he should send one of the 
boys to him at Buenos Ayres, saying that he felt 
his circumstances would warrant it with advan- 
tage to both parties, and that he had charged 
his agent in Boston with making the necessary 
arrangements, and furnishing the outfit. 

Letter to his father. 

Buenos Ayees, July 5, 1842. 

My Dear Father : It is evening ; the clock has 
struck nine. We are seated at home " by the 
side of a round table." We have our room 
snugly closed, and a good coal fire in our stove 
at the distance of six feet from us. But this is 
not all ; while we muse the fire in our hearts is 
burning, and we fancy ourselves some six thou- 
sand miles nearer to you than we are in reality. 
But to return to your letter. How shall we 
thank you sufficiently for it ? It is next to a 
visit from you in person, and it breathes a spirit 
of affection and tenderness, hightened by your 
cheerful manner of expressing it, which is very 
pleasing to us both. E. sends assurances of love. 
We do hope that this will meet you in the midst 
of a plentiful harvest, enjoying the smiles of our 
heavenly Father under your loaded vines, with 
health improved, and other and better summers 
in store for you. In answer to your inquiries 



FRUITS AND VEGETABLES. 279 

respecting our fruits, vegetables, <fec., we have 
a very feio apples. For what reason so few I 
know not. They are all of one kind, and the 
opposite side of the river produces the most of 
them. Some of the upper and western prov- 
inces, near the foot of the Andes, enjoy a cli- 
mate more favorable, and produce the fruit more 
plentifully. Sometimes they are brought down 
in carts, a distance of five to six hundred miles, 
and though small, are sold for one dollar each ! 
But the dollar is worth only six cents. United 
States currency. The Irish potato is raised here, 
but not in large quantities. The dryness of our 
seasons is very liable to destroy the crop. They 
are small, and the medium size would compare 
with hen's eggs. In our market they sell for 
two and a half or three dollars per pound — equal 
to fii'teen and eighteen cents. But owing to the 
country being engaged in war, all prices are 
higher than usual at present. Praying that God 
may bless and keep you both, I am, &c. 

In a letter to his sister in K., of September 
6th, Mr. Blake announces the birth of a daugh- 
ter, on the 30th ult. He adds, " She was born 
on the day of Santa Rosa, who, in the Roman 
calendar, is the patroness saint of this conti- 
nent ; from which some of our Catholic neigh- 
bors augur great things ! " He continues : " The 



280 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

political and commercial news which reaches me 
from time to time from the United States is not 
calculated to give me very exalted views of my 
country. The religious intelligence is the only 
thing which has any redeeming qualities. This 
alone keeps alive my hopes of her future great- 
ness. 

" I am daily expecting C. B. to join me, accord- 
ing to my proposal to his father. If he is tract- 
able, modest, and affectionate, I think his 
religious interests will not be sacrificed by com- 
ing here. His age is not so great as to inspire 
him with that degree of independence which, 
when regardless of restraint, would be very dan- 
gerous in this country. I notice that your son 
W. graduates at college about this time. I 
hope he will have his principles fixed on religious 
matters before he launchos out into the world 
for a livelihood, thus securing almost the only 
safeguard he can have ; and you may tell him 
from me, that his prospects, even for this life, are 
poor without this, — infinitely better with it. I 
say it from experience and observation." 

Mr. Blake's business calling him to Monte 
Yideo for a time, we have one letter to his wife, 
from which we shall make a few extracts. They 
are interesting as showing how he ever kept in 
mind the great end of life. 



LETTER TO HIS WIFE. 281 

The Lord's Day, Monte Video, Dec. 4. 

My Dearest Friend : After thanking our 
heavenly Father that he has brought me safely 
to this place, (in doing which I did not forget to 
commend you, our little one, and the friends 
with whom you are, to his keepmg and protec- 
tion,) I have seated myself in my room at the 
steamboat hotel, to write you. The first night 
out, we lay at anchor off Colonia, where we rode 
out a heavy gale, the second night we lay an- 
chored off the entrance to this port. 

Our captain is a pleasant, agreeable shipmas- 
ter, but very much prejudiced against psalm- 
singers and temperance people. I claimed the 
privilege of belonging to both these classes, and 
told him that as such I would bear my part of 
the reproach. I said all that I thought I could 
with propriety or profit, and it was received 

without any outward show of offense. Mr. , 

whom I met on the Mole, kindly brought me to 
this hotel. Before we parted he in\dted me to 
dine with him to-day, which, from its being the 
Sabbath, I declined. He let me off with a pretty 
good grace, but there seemed in his manner, as if 
in spite of himself, a condemnatory spirit, whether 
of the asker or refuser I am not able to say. 

The contempt with which he had seen the cause 
of his Master treated made our Christian friend 



282 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

feel like a stranger and a pilgrim on the earth. 
In this spirit he appears to have penned the 
next paragraph, and some of his utterances seem 
to have been prophetic. 

" So here I am, alone in the world ! I have a 
room ; but no house, no home, no family with 
me ; but, blessed be his name, I love to find and 
think of my God. Although I am a ' psalm- 
singer,' I am happy and contented. It is pleas- 
ant to think that I shall not be long away from 
you; that we shall soon meet again. But how 
transporting the thought of a better meeting 
above ! 

< O, happy hour ! O, blest abode ! 
I shall be near and like my God ; 
Nor flesh nor sin shall more control 
Tlie sacred pleasures of the soul.' 

These spiritual reflections sweeten my earthly 
joys, as they, no doubt, do yours ; and our 
union in this life is closer as we both look for- 
ward to a happy union with Christ in a purified 
state beyond the grave. Do not conceal your 
light under a bushel. Remember your respon- 
sibility to God, the great day of account, the 
shortness of life, the few psalms we shall have 
time to sing ; and may our heavenly Father 
protect and guide you.'* 



LOSSES. 283 

To his twin brother at New Haven. 

Buenos Ayees, Feb. 18. 

My Dear Brother John : Your kind letter 

of , lies before me, and makes one of a 

large number that have been accumulating while 
I have been absent for a month, and very busy 
at Monte Video. We have been prosperous 
here ; but our commercial intercourse with the 
United States the last year has caused us to pay 
dearly for our connection with the land of the 
free. One of your New York houses failed, and 
took us in for eight thousand dollars ; and our 
losses from shipments to the United States have 
deprived me of more than one or two years 
labor. Still, we live and hope. So much for 
fortune-making ; but we are not unhappy. 

So far as politics are concerned we are quiet ; 
and I believe M. Rosas and all his satellites are 
heartily sorry for the excesses they committed 
here in April last. Monte Video is now threat- 
ened with all the horrors of a siege and a revolu- 
tion. Every body is flocking hither from thence. 
So the world goes. I regret the commercial 
troubles in the United States. I hope your 
house will be spared the necessity of succumb- 
ing to them. 



284 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

From the Boston Recorder. 

Buenos Ayres, June 19, 1843. 

The " Society for the Promotion of Christian 
Worship," in this city, held its first annual meet- 
ing on the 20th March last. The report of the 
directors showed it to be in a prosperous state 
as to finances, and in the unanimity and broth- 
erly feeling existing among its members, col- 
lected, as they are, from various denominations 
of Christians. The chapel was first opened for 
divine service on the 8th of January, and the 
average attendance since may be safely estimated 
at one hundred and fifty. The lease of the 
pews bids fair to raise a sufficient amount 
annually for the support of the pastor, the Rev. 
Mr. Norris. An interesting Sabbath school, 
with about fifty pupils, has been established. 
This promises much toward saving the children 
of Protestants from the corrupt practices and 
enticing influences of the Romish church. It is 
to be hoped that the gospel may be disseminated 
through the instrumentality of this society, and 
that a way may be opened for its introduction 
among a people who know not its blessings. 

Alas, for South America ! How shall her de- 
luded millions obtain the bread of life if those 
who are favored with the divine revelation, 
whose lot is cast among them, do not unite and 
promote the preaching of the gospel ? 



THE JESUITS. 285 

The national Roman clnirch, connected, as it 
is, with politics, and taking sides with the dom- 
inant party in the government, is at present 
quite in favor with the people ; and since, by 
a decree of the supreme authority, every sermon 
must contain and enforce federal principles, the 
citizen, who would not be suspected of political 
defection, will not neglect the sanctuary. It is 
known that the order of the Jesuits, which has, 
within a few years, been reestablished here, was 
broken up, and again reestablished. This last 
measure was considered necessary, no doubt, on 
the part of the government, to maintain its pop- 
ularity, as the Jesuits had succeeded in gaining 
the affections of the people by their devotion to 
education and their sanctimonious bearing. The 
government, • however, were getting somewhat 
jealous of them, and this jealousy was hight- 
ened by the intrigues of the Franciscans and 
Dominicans. A little bickering among them- 
selves caused a petition to be presented to the 
governor on the 20th March last, which resulted 
in a decree for the expulsion of the whole body, 
commanding that within the eight days preced- 
ing the 1st of April every soul of them should 
leave the country by sea, and not return. The 
chief of police was ordered to read the decree 
to each one while in the act of embarking, to 
make it more impressive, and fix it in the mem- 



286 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

cry. So once more Buenos Ayres is free from 
the Jesuits. 

The following letters will show what the sub' 
ject of this memoir was in his family, and his 
faithfulness in seeking the best interests of a 
young person committed to his care. 

Buenos Ayres, Feb. 18. 

My Dear Brother : I ought, ere this, to 
have replied to your kind and confiding letter, 
dated from New York. I do often think of you 
and your trials, and I do sympathize deeply 
with you. I have been long expecting your son 
C, and I much regret that he was not sent to 
New York to come by the bark " Mason Bar- 
ney," one of our own vessels, with a good cap- 
tain. Our clergyman and his family left that 
city in September last as passengers in it. I 
should have arranged for this, but supposed he 
would come by an earlier arrival.* 

With regard to your solicitude for C, it is 
very natural and reasonable ; but he will have 
religious privileges here, and perhaps as much 
influence of that kind may be brought to bear 
upon him as if he were at home. We have 
now a chapel and regular Sabbath preaching, a 
Sabbath school, prayer meetings, public and 

* The lad did take passage in this vessel on a subsequent trip. 



ARRIVAL OF HIS NEPHEW. 287 

private libraries, &c. My wishes for him will 
■embrace both his temporal and eternal interests. 
I endeavor to rule my house as a Christian, and 
tx> exert a reliajious influence in it. 

To the same. 

Aug 19. 

Dear Brother : Your son arrived safely in 
the " Mason Barney " on the 4th inst. I am 
strongly interested for him. Every thing for 
his good, so far as my ability extends, I mean 
he shall have. In order to inculcate habits of 
industry and economy I may sometimes require 
more than he may think necessary, during his 
boyhood, but nothing but what a riper judgment 
will thank me for. I shall make it a point to 
give him instruction daily, to regard his health, 
and, as an important duty of my own, see that 
he does study the Scriptures, and keeps the 
Sabbath ; and I shall often remind him of his 
duty to his Maker. Indeed if I do not succeed, 
in some measure, in this, I shall have no hope 
of his benefiting himself or others by remain- 
ing here, for the two sides from which to 
choose are so opposite, that there is not, as in 
the United States, a middle way between them. 
C. has entered a young men's Bible class, 
taught by an English Congregational Christian 
of much experience. Further, we have taken 



"288 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

him into a little circle of two or three fam- 
ilies of us who meet once a week to study thei 
Bible. He has been attending, and we hope 
he will continue to do so, a weekly prayer 
meeting on Thursday evenings. He assists us 
also in the choir on the Sabbath, where he 
has the privilege of hearing the gospel from a 
very faithful and devoted pastor. 

I shall insist on his writing to you as often 
as once a month, at least ; and if you and his 
brothers and sisters should keep up a frequent 
correspondence with him, it would be a great 
advantage to him and them. 

I hope you will often remind him of his duty 
to God, and of the importance of that thorough 
spiritual change which the Scriptures enjoin, in 
order to please his Maker and keep more perfectly 
his commandments. May our heavenly Father 
bless and prosper you in your family and in 
your public ministrations. E. unites with me 
in love to you all. 

m 

Letter to his father and mother. 

Buenos Ayres, March 8. 

My Dear Father and Mother : I have but 
a moment to write you, and my heart is too 
full for my pen. Do you live ? Are you well ? 
And how do you fare? Has kind Providence 
watched over and kept you, as he has us in this 



TO HIS FATHER. 289 

land of strangers ? We have been much 
blessed with health. Our little daughter is 
well, and grows finely. I hope we shall be 
able some day to put her into your arms, that 
she may have your blessing. May the blessing 
of our heavenly Father rest on you, is the prayer 
of your affectionate son. 

G. W. B 
19 



290 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 



CHAPTER XYII. 



Death of Mr. Blake. — Letter from Mrs. Blake. — Letter from Kev. 
Mr. Norris. — Inscription on Gravestone. 



We come suddenly to the closing scene. We 
have seen our dear Christian friend in the vari- 
ous relations of life, and have seen how, through 
the grace of Christ, a Christian can live. In 
the following letter we see how, through the 
same grace, a Christian can die. 

Letter from Mrs. Blake to her brother-in-law 
in Boston. 

Buenos Ayres, Jan. 24, 1844. 

My Dear Brother : It is with a heavy heart, 
and with feelings too painful to be described, 
that I take my pen to write you. The Lord has 
seen fit to lay his afflictive hand upon me, and 
has taken away my dear husband and your dear 
brother. It is a painful task to me to commu- 
nicate such sad intelligence, and it is very hard 
for me to bring my mind to realize that it is so. 
His death was so sudden and unexpected, that it 
found me totally unprepared to sustain the shock. 



DEATH OP MR. BLAKE. 291 

He arose on Tuesday morning, the 2d inst., 
apparently as well as usual ; but after breakfast, 
complained of feeling slightly unwell. He, how- 
ever, went to the store, but returned at eleven, 
worse ; and on Friday, the 5th, he breathed his 
last. His disease was bilious colic. His suffer- 
ings were very great through nearly all his 
illness, but he was not considered dangerously 
sick until the day previous to his death. 

It seems sometimes as if my affliction were 
greater than I can bear; but I know who has 
done it, and while I feel bowed down beneath 
the chastening rod, I trust I am enabled to say, 
The Lord's will be done, and not mine. To be 
deprived of my nearest and dearest earthly 
friend, of so kind and affectionate a husband, in 
§0 sudden a manner, and situated as I am now, is 
a very severe and sore trial, and one which my 
poor nature, of itself, is quite unable to bear. 
But, oh, what a comfort, what a blessing it is, 
that we have such a heavenly Friend to go to in 
every time of trouble! How many precious 
promises he has given us of comfort and conso- 
lation, if we only put our trust and confidence 
in him. I feel that I should sink under this 
affliction were it not for his assisting grace. 

As my dear husband's illness was so short 
and so painful, he was able to converse but little 
on any subject, but he left good evidence that 



292 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

his peace was made with God. Death found 
him with his work done, and well done ; and, I 
doubt not, he has gone to reap the reward of 
his labors. His daily life was as if he was 
constantly anticipating such an event. He ac- 
customed himself, while in health, to view death 
as perhaps near, and when it came, it had no 
terrors. The little he said during his illness 
evinced perfect composure and resignation to the 
will of God. He said to me, the morning before 
he died, " Do not be distressed — trust in God. 
It is the Lord ; let him do what seemeth to him 
good." The few directions he gave respecting 
what he wished done, were given with as much 
composure as if he had been going to leave home 
for a week. 

While we mourn, it is not as those who have 
no hope ; and we will rejoice that we have so 
much comfort and consolation in our friend's 
death. Our loss is unspeakable gain to him, 
and he is, doubtless, free from all pain, and suf- 
fering, and trials of every kind. He is now 
engaged in praising his Maker and Redeemer, 
whom it was his chief aim to serve and glorify 
while on earth. It is my earnest desire that 
this affliction may be sanctified to me, and to all 
his friends. 

The young nephew, before referred to, writes 



LETTER OP REV. MR. NORRIS. 293 

under same date, to his aunt in Keene: " Before 
morning, on Friday, we thought he could not 
live long. He was aware of it himself, and even 
the day before talked about death very calmly. 
His principal conversation was of Jesus Christ 
and heaven, exhorting all to come to the Lord. 
He said, the day before he died, 'How hard it- 
would be for me to repent if I had put it off 
until now.' He was buried the next day, in the 
afternoon. The funeral was attended by a great 
many natives, as well as Americans and English." 

About three months after his decease, a second 
child was born to him, which survived only two 
or three days. The anticipation of this event 
would naturally increase the anxiety and dis- 
tress of these parents in view of a separation, but 
a covenant God was the support of each. 

The following was furnished by his pastor in 
Buenos Ayres, Rev. W. H. Norris, now in the 
United States, and holding a charge in the 
Methodist Episcopal Church ; — 

New York, March 24, 1855. 

I made the acquaintance of your brother in 
the early part of my residence as missionary in 
Monte Video. He was then just married, and 
on his way to Buenos Ayres. He introduced 



294 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

himself to me as a friend of the Saviour, and as 
interested in his cause. Attending our place of 
worship he aided in singing, and the first Sab- 
bath he was with us addressed our little Sabbath 
school. After a few weeks, much to our regret, 
he left for Buenos Ayres, where, during the ab- 
sence of the missionary for some months, and 
until the arrival of his successor, he gathered 
and taught the remains of the Sabbath school in 
his own house. He took an active part in form- 
ing the society for the support of Protestant 
worship in that city, (a society composed of vari- 
ous denominations, yet in vigorous operation,) 
and aided in erecting the Mission Church. As 
secretary of this society, he procured my appoint- 
ment as pastor to this church the following year. 
On opening the church for worship, he took 
charge of the choir, and led our devotions the 
last Sabbath he spent on earth. When we re- 
organized the Sabbath school, he was selected 
as the teacher of a Bible class, and held the office 
till his death, having nearly finished a course of 
instruction on the Acts of the Apostles. The 
Sabbath before he died he was, with the few 
Christians in my charge, at a meeting held in 
my study for special prayer, and, I think, led in 
prayer, and made a short address. At this time 
he was apparently in perfect health. In a few 
days he was a corpse. I was with him, saw him 



FUNERAL. 295 

die, closed his eyes, but found it nearly impossi- 
ble to realize that he was gone. His sudden 
death made a deep impression on our commu- 
nity. A week before, no one among us bade 
fairer to live for years. There was no man in 
the congregation who could not have been spared 
with less loss and inconvenience ; none whose 
place it seemed so difficult to supply ; no one 
who promised so much for the cause of Christ in 
that dark land. Silently bowing before this in- 
scrutable providence, we were constrained to 
acknowledge that God's ways are not ours. " He 
kills'the workmen but carries on the work." - "; 
I think I knew George W. Blake well. I 
know that I loved him much. I believed him 
to be an honest, conscientious man ; a humble, 
sincere Christian ; consistent and exemplary in 
life, and an honor to his profession. And such, 
I judge, was the estimation in which he was held 
by the community in which he lived respected, 
and died lamented. 

The funeral of Mr. Blake was numerously at- 
tended by the foreign and native population of 
Buenos Ayres ; showing the high respect in 
which he was held. A brief, but highly com- 
plimentary, obituary notice of the deceased 
appeared in the " British Packet," a paper then 
published in that city ; another of similar import 



296 THE YOUNG CHRISTIAN MERCHANT. 

ill the New York Observer. His decease was 
the occasion of bringing to light other deeds of 
kindness done by him, but unknown to his 
friends until then. His remains were buried in 
Buenos Ayres, but removed to this country, and 
deposited in Mount Auburn Cemetery, in the 
following year. A neat marble slab, with the 
following inscription, marks the spot where they 
await the resurrection of the just. 

George W. Blake, 

A Native of Westborough, Mass., 

Several years a Merchant in Buenos Ayres, S. A. 

Where he died, January 5th, 1844, 

Aged 36. 

His Remains were removed and deposited 

in this place, 

July 2d, 1845. 

He was a Merchant much respected. 

A Husband, Father, Brother, Friend, greatly 

beloved. 

In the Church of Christ eminently useful. 

Mr. Blake's industry and perseverance as a 
merchant did not go unrewarded. He left a 
competence for the loved ones who looked to him 
for support, while he preceded them to take 
possession of the richer inheritance which Jesus 
has provided for them that love him. 



t 




University of 
Connecticut 

Libraries 







r ' \ :,vf.<.-m. 



Sabbath SoiIool Libmry. 



Keep this is'ook clean, and return it ilione ■^'r^^Jiu 



^- ''Knjw Hmi,i >.ui- C,n;\ of thv-feither, and rferie bird v.i^u r , e;;?ccii 
t heart, and '' ' ' ' " l^^^^' 

|I Of thee ; I. L 

! ^- ■ • ■> ■■ !> Vi '^ '■ \ hW. ^ :•..>-*. ^- ^ «. . >^i. i J. J- i. ^^.j 



