* ^ 




,4/ ^ 


















V 






\ 















'bv 1 ' 







^0« 











■MM ~^<U)L«ttSL2 YldL*»~Ur&S- 



kvityfc 



( *v_ 





I - = i 



feriffigK 



? 




^ 






C 



i& 



C^ 



Smrarittr €rart Inmitf, 

150 NASSAU-STKEET, NEW-YORK. 






V 

U 



Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1854, by 0. R. 
Kingsbury, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern 
District of New York. 



Mrs. Hennen Jennings 



v 






Deeper dig into this mine — 
Brighter yet the jewels shine. 



IS 






Pg Sible. 

My own dear Bible ! How I love 
On these fair leaves to look ! 

My friend, my guide to realms above, 
My bright, my golden book ! 

In early life it touched my heart, 

It gave me eyes to see ; 
ne'er may cold indifference part 

My own loved book and me! 

To silent rooms and shady bowers 
The cherished page I bear ; 

Sole witness of my secret hours — 
Companion of my prayer. 

Sage penmen were inspired of old, 

Its treasures to record ; 
Here in a glass mine eyes behold 

My dying, risen Lord. 

What heavenly kindness in his face, 
What beauty in his crown ! 

best of books ! wherein such grace, 
Such love to man is shown. 



PREFACE. 



This series of Youth's Bible Studies, com- 
plete in six volumes, is designed for the train- 
ing of the student both in religious knowledge 
and devotion. It may be characterized as a 
youth's manual of the prominent historical 
facts, essential doctrines, laws, and sentiments 
of the sacred Scriptures, interspersed with 
practical lessons and meditative poetry. The 
matter is broken into short topics, condensed 
into the fewest words, and diversified with 
question and answer, precept and narrative. 
No extraneous matter is introduced ; commen- 
taries are not quoted; Scripture speaks for 
itself, and the practical hints are such as most 
obviously flow from the text. The embellish- 
ments are closely connected with the sense, and 
a part of the lessons of the page. 

It is therefore a work that should not only 
be read, but studied, and may be used by the 



PREFACE. 



single student as an aid in self-cultivation, or 
as a class-book under the guidance of parents 
and teachers. Prom the topics and frequent 
headings introduced in the work, questions 
may be easily formed for examination. 

It is hoped that the varied character and 
condensed brevity of this work, divesting it of 
what is bulky, heavy, and wearisome, will make 
it grateful to young inquiring minds, and be 
the means of awakening an interest in the 
marvellous stores of wisdom, knowledge, and 
beauty contained in the Scriptures, which shall 
lead them from these initiatory pages to the 
study of the Bible itself, with a new and cor- 
dial appreciation of its value. f. m. c. 



[0«tj['s $iik Statths, 




HAT is a Bible ? 

The word Bible means simply Book, but the 
term is now applied only to the word of God. 

The book called by us the Bible, contains 
the revealed will of God as made known to 
holy men of old, and by them written down 
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. 

This book is entitled, The Sacred Scriptures 
of the Old and New Testaments ; it is called also, 
holy writ, and the word of God. 



10 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



" All Scripture is given by inspiration of 
God." 2 Tim. 3 : 16. 

" The words that I speak unto you, they are 
spirit, and they are life. 77 John 6 : 63. 

" I will hear what God the Lord will speak. 77 
Psalm 85 : 8. 



Who was the earliest writer of the Bible ? 
Moses wrote the first five books, namely, 



^umbers, 





ett tetotiom$ 



These, taken together, are called the Penta- 
teuch ; a word which signifies Five Books. 



"In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth. 77 Gen. 1:1. 

" By the word of the Lord were the heavens 
made, and all the host of them by the breath of 
his mouth. 77 Psa. 33 : 6. 



PENTATEUCH. 11 



GENESIS. 



" In the beginning *' — with these words sublime, 
Lo, Grenesis unfolds the gates of time. 

TIME AND ETERNITY. 

Time began when God created the heavens 
and the earth. Duration before this period is 
called Eternity; and when time shall be no 
more, eternity will remain. 

Years are numbered from the commencement 
of time, but chronology computes from the 
birth of Christ ; giving a date to all historical 
events, according to the years before or after 
that era in which they took place. 



Look backward, and you find Creation's morn 
Four thousand years and four ere Christ was born. 

Four thousand years and four had filled their span, 
When Christ the Lord came down to dwell with man. 



" Where wast thou when I laid the founda- 
tions of the earth?" 

"When the morning stars sang together, 
and all the sons of God shouted for joy." Job 
38:4,7. 



12 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Who are the Angels ? 

Angels were created before men. They are 
God's host, standing around the throne of his 
glory ; a multitude that no man can number. 
They are the sons of God that shouted for joy 
when the earth was created. 



" And I heard the voice of many angels round 
about the throne ; and the number of them was 
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands 
of thousands. 77 . Rev. 5 : 11. 

The angels of light sin not, neither do they 
die. God often sends them to the aid of good 
men. They bear the souls of the saints, at their 
death, to their eternal home in heaven. 

" The beggar died, and was carried by the 
angels into Abraham's bosom." Luke 16 : 22. 

"Neither can they die any more; for they 
are equal unto the angels. 77 Luke 20 : 36. 

Who are the fallen Angels ? 

The angels were all made holy, but some of 
them sinned against God, and were cast out of 
heaven. These are now angels of darkness. 
They are called evil spirits, fallen angels, and devils. 
They are abhorred by God, and their name should 
never be thoughtlessly or heedlessly spoken. 



PENTATEUCH. 13 



The prince of the fallen angels is known in 
the Bible by various names : Satan, Lucifer, Beel- 
zebub, Abaddon, and Apollyon. He is called 
also the Evil One, the Adversary, the Accuser, 
the Tempter, the Destroyer, the Serpent, the 
Dragon, and the Angel of the bottomless pit. 

"And the angels that kept not their first 
estate, but left their own habitation, he hath 
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness 
unto the judgment of the great day." Jude 6. 

" Sending evil angels among them." Psalm 
78 : 49. 



Which of the angels of light are known by name ? 

Michael and Gabriel. 

Michael is called the archangel and prince 
of the angels. He is opposed to Satan, the 
prince of the powers of darkness. 

Gabriel appears as a messenger from heaven. 
He is sent to explain the meaning of a vision 
to the prophet Daniel ; and in the New Testa- 
ment he announces the birth of John the Bap- 
tist, and afterwards that of Christ. 
How was the work of creation performed ? 

It pleased the almighty Maker of heaven and 
earth to divide the work of creation into six 



Bib Stud. 



14 BIBLE STUDIES. 

parts, or periods. This was for the benefit of 
mankind, to give us, from the beginning, a di- 
vision of time into weeks, which should last to 
the end of the world ; and also to show us, by 
his great example, that we should work six days 
and rest one. 



THE SIX DAYS' WORK; OR, SONG OF 
THE CREATION. 

When the void sea and earth 
Lay formless in their birth, 
To darkness God gave light, 
And made the day and night. 

So passed eve and morn, 

And the second day was born. 

» 

He spread the starry sky, 

A firmament on high ; 

Clouds above, and mists below, 

At his word began to flow. 

So passed eve and morn, 
And the third day was born. 

The waters and the land 

Came forth at his command : 

Trees, waving golden fruit ; 

Earth, rich with seed and root. 
So passed eve and morn, 
And the fourth day was born. 



PENTATEUCH. 15 

He set the rolling spheres, 

To number days and years ; 

The sun's transcendent ray, 

For the blessing of the day ; 

And the moon's familiar light, 

For the blessing of the night. 

So passed eve and morn, 
And the fifth day was born. 

Now life on earth began : 

Great whales of mighty span, 

With the swarming finny race, 

In the waters took their place ; 

And the countless feathered throng 

Filled the atmosphere with song. 

God blessed them from on high, 

Saying, Live, and multiply. 

So passed eve and morn, 
And the sixth day was born. 

Then the quadrupeds came forth, 

And the creeping things of earth ; 

Till in final beauty stood 

Man, erect before his God : 

A shape of godlike form, 

With living spirit warm ; 

And dominion to him given, 

Of all things under heaven. 

So passed eve and morn, 

And the seventh day was born. 






16 BIBLE STUDIES. 

His hand the Maker stayed, 

For heaven and earth were made, 

Creation's work was o'er ; 

Holy rest for evermore 

Like a breath from God came down, 

The last great day to crown. 

God resting on that day, 
The Sabbath passed away. 



" And God saw every thing that he had made, 
and behold, it was very good." Gen. 1 : 31. 

" So God created man in his own image : in 
the image of God created he him ; male and 
female created he them." Gen. 1 : 27. 



Now man is born, and angels sing 

A welcome from on high ; 
Eejoicing o'er this new-born king, 

Heir of the earth and sky. 

Creator, Holy Spirit, Lord, 

To thee the song they raise : 
Hark how they strike the sounding chord, 

How earnest is their praise. 

A nobler work than this of old, 

We in redemption trace : 
Wake loftier strains, ye harps of gold, 

For man renewed by grace. 



PENTATEUCH. 17 



In what did the image of God in which man was 
made consist? 

1. In the possession of conscience and those 
faculties of the mind which distinguish man 
from the brute creation. 

2. In the dominion and authority granted 
him over the inferior creatures. 

3. In holiness and freedom from sin. 

" God created man after his own image, in 
knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, with 
dominion over the creatures. 77 

Whp,t is implied in the rest of the Sabbath ? 

"And God blessed the seventh day, and sanc- 
tified it ; because that in it he had rested from 
all his work which God created and made. 77 
Gen. 2 : 3. 

"Remember the Sabbath-day to keep it 
holy. 77 Exod. 20 : 8. 

" The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord 
thy God : in it thou shalt not do any work. 77 
Exod. 20 : 10. 

Here are two points to be observed: rest 
from common labor, and the sanctification of 
the day, which must be by holy employments. 
What are holy employments ? 

Doing good works, and performing religious 



18 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




duties. We must save life, take care of the 
sick, and do what is necessary for the health 
of the body, as well as of the soul. But the 
special holy employments that should distin- 
guish the Sabbath, are prayer, praise, and relig- 
ious meditation; the public and private wor- 
ship of God ; reading the Bible, and those works 
of good men which nourish piety in the soul, 
and encourage a religious life. 



PENTATEUCH. 19 



THE SABBATH. 

How soft the footsteps of the day ! 

Sweet symbol of that rest, 
When saints shall shine in white array, 

By their Redeemer blest. 

Then let ns cease from toil and care. 

And grateful anthems raise ; 
Our hearts be love, our voicea prayer, 

Our joyful work be praise. 

See how the conquering Saviour rose, 

While death his captive lay ; 
So may he crush our inward foes, 

And lift our hearts to-day. 

The beauteous feet are on the hills, 

Good tidings in the air : 
Lord, in thy courts thy grace distils, 

And we will worship there. 

Spread o'er the house thy wing divine, 

Oh, fair celestial Dove ; 
And while we rest, grant some sweet sign 

Of endless rest above. 



THE FIRST PAIR. 
Adam and Eve were the first man and 
woman. They lived in the Garden of Eden. 



20 BIBLE STUDIES. 

They knew no sin, nor sorrow, nor pain ; they 
were always young. No thorns or thistles 
grew around them. No dangerous storms, or 
floods, or whirlwinds swept over them ; no 
wild beasts or venomous serpents filled them 
with fear. They were innocent and happy, 
but they were not idle. It is not good for man 
to live in idleness. They were commanded to 
till the earth, and to take care of the fruits. 
Moderate labor is pleasant : work and rest are 
each good in their season. 

It was not good for them in all things to 
have their own will. Obedience to God and 
self-denial were laws of their being, given to 
them when they were first created. Of one 
tree in the garden God forbade them to eat. 
It was called the tree of knowledge of good 
and evil. Ask not why it was forbidden: it 
was God's good pleasure thus to try them, and 
he made known to them that by eating this 
forbidden fruit they would bring sin into the 
world, and become subject to death, both tem- 
poral and eternal. 



PENTATEUCH. 21 



LANGUAGE. 

Was Adam created with a knowledge of language, 
or did he form it himself? 

God, when he gave to Adam the organs of 
speech, undoubtedly bestowed on him the power 
and knowledge requisite to form a language 
equal to his wants. Thus he could at once 
give an appropriate name to the various objects 
around him. To give names to things, is the 
first step in framing a language by which men 
can understand each other. 

It is quite certain that men would not form 
a language before they had associated together ; 
nor do we see how they could have entered into 
social relations, without having first acquired a 
knowledge of language, as a medium of com- 
munication with each other. 

We must come to the conclusion, therefore, 
that God is the Author of language. 



" And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to 
the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the 
field." Gen. 2 : 20. 



22 BIBLE STUDIES. 

In graceful homage, at their Maker's word, 

The new-born creatures sought their sovereign 

lord ; 
Pleased and submissive to his feet they came, 
And each received some fair peculiar name. 



THE FALL. 

The Fall of Man — What mean these words of woe ? 
Whence did he fall, and to what depth below? 

A few words will tell the whole sad tale. 
He fell from holiness and happiness to sin and 
misery. How long Adam and Eve, in a state 
of innocence, inhabited the garden of Eden, we 
know not. Tempted by Satan, they ate of the 
fruit which God had forbidden. Thus they 
became sinners, and consequently subject to 
remorse, fear, pain, sorrow, disease, and death. 
They were no longer children of God, and heirs 
of heaven, but wilful rebels, entangled in the 
snares of Satan. 

God came down to pronounce sentence on 
the guilty pair. He said to the woman, Thy 
husband shall rule over thee, and thine offspring 
shall bring thee sorrow ; and to the man, Thou 
shalt eat bread by the sweat of thy brow. He 
then expelled them from the garden, and lest 



PENTATEUCH. 23 



they should return, set an angel to guard it 
with a fiery sword. 

But "in the midst of wrath, God remember- 
ed mercy/' and cheered them with the promise 
that " the seed of the woman should bruise the 
serpent's head." That is, a Saviour should be 
born of woman, who would destroy the power 
of Satan, and save his people from their sins. 
Adam and Eve believed God, and looking for- 
ward to the coming of Christ, were comforted 
in their hearts. 



" By one man sin entered into the world, and 
death by sin; and so death passed upon all 
men, for that all have sinned. 77 Rom. 5 : 12. 

"For as by one man 7 s disobedience many 
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one 
shall many be made righteous. 77 Rom. 5 : 19. 

" For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ 
shall all be made alive. 77 1 Cor. 15 : 22. 



LOOK WITHIN. 
Had I been Adam, says proud man, 
I still had dwelt in Eden's span ; 
No tempter had my jewel won, 
No woman's wile my soul undone. 



24 BIBLE STUDIES. 



Had I been Eve, the woman cries, 
I ne'er had coveted the prize : 
True to my God, I would have stood, 
Nor plucked* the fair forbidden food. 

Yet evermore man, woman, child, 

Are just like Eden's pair beguiled ; 

The motives that wrought out their woe, 

Have ever governed men below ; 

Just where the tempter struck his dart, 

He still gains access to the heart. 

How many present joys obtain 

By payment of a future pain ! 

A distant mansion in the skies 

Less than the dross of earth they prize ; 

Toil day and night for world-renown, 

Yet risk an everlasting crown I 

Then why hurl back thy soul's disgrace 
On them the parents of the race ? 
Lament their fall, but look within, 
And hasten to repent of sin : 
Leave their deep guilt at mercy's throne, 
And seek a Saviour for thine own. 



PENTATEUCH. 



25 



PUBLIC WORSHIP. 

In all ages of the world people 
have met together for the worship 
of God. 

Behold this mound of earth and 
stone. Adam has raised it for an 
altar. 

An altar is an elevated place 
where religious of- 
ferings are made. 
The public wor- 
ship of God is no 
new thing : it is 
the most ancient 
way, the way of 
the first family on 
earth. 




"Ask for the old paths, where is the good 
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest 
for your souls." Jer. 6 : 16. 



26 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




SACRIFICE. 

When were sacrifices first established? 

This is not expressly mentioned in Scripture. 
The first offerings of which we have any ac- 
count were those of Cain and Abel; but the 
sacred narrative seems to imply that such ob- 
servances were customary with Adam and his 
family. 

It may be inferred also, from the nature and 
design of sacrifices, that they were established 



PENTATEUCH. 21 



immediately after the fall, when the Redeemer 
was promised. 

The " coats of skins," which the Almighty 
gave to Adam and Eve for clothing, were prob- 
ably taken from animals that had been slain 
for sacrifice. 

What was the most important of the sacrifices? 

A slain animal, offered up to God, ancTbtirnt 
upon the altar; the blood being first poured 
out upon the ground. 

It was designed as a memorial of the death 
introduced by sin, and of the blood of Christ 
to be shed as an atonement for sin. 

What offering did Abel bring ? 

A lamb, or kid. It was slain, the blood 
poured upon the ground, and the whole animal, 
or the greater part of it r laid upon the altar 
and burnt. God was pleased with this offering, 
and accepted it. 

How did Grodmanifesthis acceptance of Abel's offering ? 

Probably by sending fire from heaven, like 
lightning, which kindled the wood and con- 
sumed the sacrifice. 

What offering did Cain bring ? Was it a sacrifice ? 
Was it accepted of God? 

Cain was a husbandman, and he brought a 



28 BIBLE STUDIES. 

portion of his fruits, a sheaf of corn perchance, 
or a cluster of grapes, and laid them upon the 
altar ; meaning thereby to testify his gratitude 
for the good things of this world. But God 
gave no sign that he accepted the oblation. 

Why did Abel offer a lamb, and why was God pleased 
with a sacrifice in which blood was shed? 

Because God had appointed this kind of sac- 
rifice as a sacred ordinance, prefiguring the 
mode in which men were to be saved from 
their sins. We are to look upon it as a type 
of Christ, ordained to continue until he should 
come into the world and make the great atone- 
ment for sin. 

Abel believed the promise, and showed his 
faith by offering the sacrifice which God had 
appointed. Cain offered an acknowledgment 
to the God of nature, for temporal blessings ; 
but he did not confess himself a sinner, nor 
see the necessity of a Saviour to avert from 
him the wrath of God. A sacrifice was to him 
an unmeaning ceremony — unmeaning, because 
he had not faith to see its divine import. 



" Without the shedding of blood is no remis 



b 



Heb. 9 : 22. 



PENTATEUCH. 29 



" By faith Abel offered unto God a more ex- 
cellent sacrifice than Cain." Heb. 11 : 4. 
" Bring no more vain oblations." Isa. 1 : 13. 



THE FIRST DEATH. 

Cain was angry with his brother — Why? 

" Because his own works were evil, and his 
brother's righteous." 1 John 3:12. 

God accepted the sacrifice of Abel; there- 
fore Cain envied and hated him. Anger, envy, 
and hatred, led to murder. 



"And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is 
Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: 
Am I my brother's keeper? And God said, 
What hast thou done ? The voice of thy broth- 
er's blood crieth unto me from the ground." 
Gen. 4 : 9, 10. 

" The heaven shall reveal his iniquity, and 
the earth shall rise up against him." Job 
20 : 27. 

Of all earthly kings, who is to reign the longest, and 
to have the widest dominion ? 

Death. 



30 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Lo, Cain, the first-born child of man — 

The first man-slayer, Cain ! 
Earth tasted blood, and then began 

Death o'er the earth to reign. 

Till Abel fell no death was known, 
No tomb had e'er been made ; 

Since then, with graves profusely strown, 
All earth is overlaid. 



THE MARK UPON CAIN. 

"The Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any 
finding him should kill him." Gen. 4 : 15. 

It is not known in what this mark consisted, 
and conjectures are useless, as the point cannot 
be determined. This only is understood, that 
a sign or token was in some way connected 
with Cain, by which it would be known that 
he was not to suffer death at the hands of men, 
but that God only was his judge. 

Jehovah himself pronounced the doom of the 
first murderer : 

" When thou tillest the ground, it shall not 
henceforth yield thee her strength ; a fugitive 
and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth." 



PENTATEUCH. 31 



After the flood a divine law respecting mur- 
der was established: 

" Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall 
his blood be shed; for in the image of God 
made he man." Gen. 9 : 6. 



CHILDREN OF ADAM AND EYE. 

How many sons had Adam? 

Three, by name 
Cain, Abel, Seth, are widely known to fame ; 
But more — perchance a long succession fair, 
Of sons and daughters — cheered the lonely pair. 
The Bible only runs its silver reed 
Down through the lines that to the Saviour lead ; 
And nameless leaves the unnumbered multitude 
That filled with life the world before the flood. 



ENOCH. 



Which of the patriarchs was conveyed to heaven 
without dying ? 

." And Enoch walked with God : and he was 
not; for God took him." Gen. 5 : 24. 

"By faith Enoch was translated, that he 
should not see death." Heb. 11 : 5. 



32 BIBLE STUDIES. 



CHRONOLOGY. 

From Adam's creation 
To Enoch's translation, 
Behold the years given : 
Nine hundred eighty-seven. 



THE FLOOD. 



Let earth's advancing years be all enrolled, 

Till sixteen hundred fifty-six are told, 

And then the Flood, the rushing Flood behold ! 



Why did God destroy the earth by a flood? 

" And God looked upon the earth, and be- 
hold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted 
his way upon the earth." 

"And the Lord said, I will destroy man 
whom I have created from the face of the 
earth." Gen. 6 : 7, 12. 

For what was Noah remarkable ? 

For eminent faith and strict obedience to 
the commands of God. 

" By faith, Noah being warned of God of 
things not seen as yet, moved with fear, pre- 



PENTATEUCH. 33 



pared an ark to the saving of his house; by 
which he condemned the world, and became 
heir of the righteousness which is by faith." 
Heb. 11:7. 

" Thus did Noah ; according to all that God 
commanded him, so did he. 77 Gen. 6 : 22. 

How long was the Ark in building ? 

It is generally supposed that Noah was en- 
gaged for one hundred and twenty years in 
preparing materials for the ark and in building 
it. But this is not expressly stated in the 
sacred narrative. 

"And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not 
always strive with man ; yet his days shall be 
a hundred and twenty years." Gen. 6 : 3. 

This appears to have been a merciful reprieve 
granted to that corrupt race of men, allowing 
them space for repentance and return to their 
offended God. The command to Noah to build 
an ark of gopher-wood, was apparently given 
at a later period, yet there can be little doubt 
but the whole period of one hundred and 
twenty years was employed by the patriarch 
in preaching repentance, building the ark, and 
making other preparations for the flood. 



34 BIBLE STUDIES. 



What was the form and size of the Ark ? 

Reckoning the cubit at 18 inches, the ark 
was 450 feet in length, 75 feet broad, and 45 
feet high. It is computed that the space within 
would afford ample room for the requisite 
number of animals, with provisions for their 
support during the year. 

The ark was not a vessel with keel, masts, 
and sails, like those that now navigate the 
ocean, but a large building of an oblong form, 
roofed over and separated into three stories. 
It was probably constructed so as to float and 
balance itself upon the waters. But the pro- 
tecting power of God alone preserved it from 
destruction amid the terrible conflict of the 
elements to which it was exposed. 



The ark was built of gopher-wood. The par- 
ticular tree which bore this name is not known. 
It is supposed to have been of the resinous 
kind ; either cypress, cedar, or pine. 



Can the flood be accounted for from natural causes? 

It cannot. By a wonderful display of divine 

power, the waters from above and from be- 



1 



PENTATEUCH. 35 



neath — from the clouds of heaven and the 
abysses of the ocean, were brought together, 
and poured upon the earth in a continuous 
flood until the highest mountains were cov- 
ered. 

The deluge and the preservation of Noah 
and his family from the raging waves, were 
stupendous miracles, testifying, not only to that 
guilty age, but to all mankind in subsequent 
ages, God's abhorrence of sin and his deter- 
mination to punish the sinner. 

Our Saviour refers to this amazing scene 
as an illustration of what will take place at 
the day of judgment. As it was in the days of 
Noah, " so also shall the coming of the Son of 
man be." Matt. 24 : 39. 



THE ARK. 



No sails, no rudder, had the Ark, 
But God sustained the tossing bark ; 
While clouds above, and seas below, 
Fulfilled the awful doom of woe. 
On Ararat's majestic breast, 
Behold the great encampment rest. 



36 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




Twelve months in that lone ark inclosed, 
The tenants of the earth reposed ; 
God shut them in : God opened wide 
The doors, and from the mountain side, 
Downward the long procession came — 
Man first, then creatures wild and tame, 
In well-matched pairs of every name. 



Where is mount Ararat ? 

In a province of Asia called Armenia. It is 
the highest part of a chain of mountains called 
Taurus, and is situated midway between the 
Black and Caspian seas. Hardly a traveller 
in modern times has been able to reach the top, 
on account of the immense beds of snow that 
cover it. But the natives of the country super- 



PENTATEUCH. 3? 

stitiously imagine that some remains of the ark 
are still preserved on its summit. 

What human beings were saved from the flood ? 

Noah and his family; in all, eight persons. 

How long was Noah in the Ark? 

One year and ten days. 

He went into the ark on the seventeenth 
day of the second month of the year, Gen. 
7:11; and God commanded him to go forth, 
the next year, on the twenty-seventh clay of the 
second month. Gen. 8 : 14. 



NOAH. 

Noah the Great ! — a favorite of the skies — 
A preacher bold — a hero, firm and wise — 
Prophet and priest — see how he towers serene, 
The world destroyed and world renewed between ! 
Around him, lo, what clustering glories run : 
The roaring flood, the new outbreaking sun ; 
The Ark, deep freighted with its world of life, 
Calm, grand, and stately, 'mid the sea of strife ; 
Mount Ararat, that peak of unknown height ; 
The dove, and olive-leaf, and rainbow bright. 
These wondrous scenes are blended with his fame, 
And cast their splendor on his deathless name. 



88 BIBLE STUDIES. 

The name Noah signifies rest or comfort. 

It is remarkable that this name is repeated 
five times in the course of five successive lines 
of Scripture, as if the sacred Author took 
delight in dwelling upon the name of so good 
a man. " But Noah found grace in the eyes of 
the Lord. 

" These are the generations of Noah : Noah 
was a just man and perfect in his generations, 
and Noah walked with God. 

"And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and 
Japheth. 77 Gen. 6 : 8-10. 



What security has God given to man that the earth 
will not again be destroyed by a general deluge ? 

" God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with 
him, saying, I will establish my covenant with 
you ; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more 
by the waters of a flood; neither shall there 
any more be a flood to destroy the earth. 77 

" I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall 
be for a token of a covenant between me and 
the earth. 77 

" And I will remember my covenant : and 
the waters shall no more become a flood to 
destroy all flesh. 77 Gen. 9 : 8, 11, 13, 15. 



PENTATEUCH. 39 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 

Some have inferred from the passage, " I do 
set my bow in the cloud/' that the rainbow had 
never before been seen in the heavens, and of 
course that it had never rained on the earth 
before the Flood. But the word set may be 
taken in the sense of appoint, or ordain. The 
passage will then convey the idea that the bow 
in the cloud was now chosen as a sign or 
memorial of God's gracious promise never 
again to destroy the earth by a general deluge. 

Hitherto it had appeared as a magnificent 
arch in the heavens, admired for its beauty 
and splendor ; now it shines forth after the 
storm, as a witness of the divine goodness call- 
ing for heartfelt acknowledgments of praise 
and gratitude. 



40 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




THE RAINBOW. 

All sea without a shore 
Earth never shall be more. 
The seven-twined bow of rain 
That spans the hill and plain, 
Speaks in the name of God, 
Fear ye no second flood. 



ANTEDILUVIAN WORLD. 
The population of the world was great. 
Only one language was known. Men were in 
a state of advanced civilization. Shepherds, 



PENTATEUCH. 



41 



husbandmen, musicians, poets, Gen. 4 : 23, 24, 
artificers, and chieftains, are either mentioned 
or their existence implied. After the flood 
the ordinary term of human life was gradually 
diminished. 




BIRDS OF NOAH. 
See here the Raven ! Here the Dove ! 
The bird of prey, and bird of love. 

The Raven is a bird of very black plumage ; 
fierce and plundering in its habits, as its name 
denotes. 

"Benjamin shall raven as a wolf." Gen. 
49 : 27. 

Ravenous is a word derived from raven. 

4=fc 



42 BIBLE STUDIES. 

THE DOVE. 

How gentle Noah's dove ! 

Sweet, promise-bearing dove ! 
The dove that plucked the olive-leaf, 

The dove whose name is Love. 

Come hither, dove, and bring 
Thy temper to my breast, 

Thy leaf of peace, thy faithful wing, 
To flee from strife to rest. 

Had I a dove-like heart, 

All white and pure and good, 

How swift from sin I should depart, 
And homeward fly to God. 



What divine regulations were made concerning 
food? 

The grant of food to Adam consisted of the 
vegetable creation, that is, herbs, seeds, and 
fruits, which were given to man and beast for 
sustenance. Gen. 1 : 29, 30. 

This first grant did not provide for the use 
of animal food. In a primeval state, and es- 
pecially in a warm climate, the fruits of the 
earth are sufficient for the nourishment of man. 
In Asia, even at the present day, only a small 
proportion of animal food is used. 



PENTATEUCH. 43 



The second grant was made to Noah after 
the flood, and in addition to the former grant, 
allowed him to partake of animal food, forbid- 
ding only the use of blood. 

" Every thing that liveth shall be meat for 
you; even as the green herb have I given you 
all things. But flesh, with the life thereof, 
which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat." 
Gen. 9 : 3, 4. 



Of what was the blood a type? 

Of the atoning blood of Christ. It was for- 
bidden for food, and reserved by the special 
appointment of God to be poured out in sacri- 
fice and sprinkled upon the altar. 

" No soul of you shall eat blood. I have 
given it to you upon the altar to make an 
atonement for your souls." Lev. 17 : 11, 12. 



SONS OF NOAH. 

Japheth is supposed to have been the eldest 
of Noah's sons, though Shem is usually placed 
first when they are enumerated. This honor 
was probably accorded to him as the ancestor 
of the Messiah. 



44 BIBLE STUDIES. 

The Hebrews and most of the Asiatic nations 
are descendants of Shem. 

From Japheth the Greeks, Romans, and other 
nations of Europe are derived. 

Ham was the father of the African race, and 
also of the Canaanites and several tribes in 
the southwestern part of Asia. 



PROPHECIES OF NOAH. 

Before his death, Noah in a few brief predic- 
tions described what would be the condition 
and comparative prosperity of the descendants 
of his three sons. Gen. 9 : 25-27. 

Of Canaan he said, "A servant of servants 
shall he be unto his brethren/ 7 

This was accomplished when the Canaanites 
were subdued by the Israelites, and those who 
were not exterminated were made " hewers of 
wood and drawers of water " to the conquer- 
ors. Not only the Canaanites, but the descend- 
ants of Ham in general have been brought 
into subjection by the other races. 

"Blessed be the Lord God of Shem." This 
peculiar blessing undoubtedly refers to the 
Saviour, who was promised in the line of Shem. 



PENTATEUCH. 45 



" God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall 
dwell in the tents of Shem." 

This is a remarkable prophecy, and has been 
strikingly fulfilled both in regard to religious 
privileges and temporal possessions. 

In a spiritual sense, the Gentile nations, de- 
scendants of Japheth, have obtained the bless- 
ing of Shem, being grafted into the true church, 
while millions of the children of the promise 
remain without. 

In the historical sense, the fulfilment is also 
remarkable. The race of Japheth have been 
greatly enlarged in the old world, and they 
possess nearly the whole of America. If the 
aborigines of this country were derived, as is 
supposed, from the Asiatics, the sons of Japheth 
are here dwelling in the tents of Shem. 

This is a striking illustration of the truth of 
prophecy ; showing its fulfilment four thousand 
years after it was uttered, and in a part of the 
world then unknown. 



EXPLANATIONS. 

Most of the Hebrew names were of a de- 
scriptive character. When first bestowed, the 



46 BIBLE STUDIES. 

names of persons and places had each a special 
meaning. 

Adam. This name means red. It refers to 
the ruddy complexion of the first man, and in- 
timates that he was formed of a reddish-colored 
earth. 

Eve denotes life. She was the mother of all 
mankind, and in this sense the source of life. 

Cain signifies acquired, or obtained. Eve re- 
garded this, her first-born son, as a precious 
gift obtained from God. 

Abel. This word implies simply breath. It 
is supposed to allude to the short life of Abel, 
and may have been given at his birth pro- 
phetically ; or it may have been a name which 
became current after his death. 



The land of Nod. The word JVod is the 
same as exile, or banishment. This land was so 
called because Cain was sent thither as a ban- 
ished man and a wanderer. 



Eden. This name is said to be derived from 
one which signifies pleasure. We may there- 



PENTATEUCH. 4? 



fore infer that it means the pleasant, or beautiful 
land; in other words, the Paradise. 



Where was the garden of Eden situated? 

This point is not determined. There are, 
however, strong reasons for placing it on some 
part of the rivers Tigris and Euphrates. 

Who built the first city? 

Cain, and called the city Enoch, after the 
name of his son. Gen. 4 : 17. 

Who was the first pastoral chief, or head of a wan- 
dering tribe? 

Jabal. " He was the father of such as dwell 
in tents, and of such as have cattle." Gen. 
4 : 20. 

Jabal is here pointed out as the chief of a 
tribe of herdsmen and shepherds. It serves to 
mark the era when men began to decline from 
the quiet of an agricultural life, and to scatter 
into tribes and colonies. 

Who invented musical instruments ? 

Jubal. "He was the father of all such as 
handle the harp and organ. 77 Gen. 4 : 21. 



48 BIBLE STUDIES. 



Who first discovered the art of working metals, and 
formed them into tools for the service of man? 

Tubal-cain. " An instructor of every arti- 
ficer in brass and iron. 77 Gen. 4 : 22. 

Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal-cain, were three sons 
of Lamech 



MAN DESIGNED FOR SOCIAL LIFE 

The benevolent Creator when he made man, 
designed him for an intelligent, humane, social 
being. 

Adam was not created a barbarian, and his 
immediate descendants were not huntsmen and 
rovers, but cultivators of the earth. They had 
fixed habitations, and dwelt together in cities 
and villages. Tents and wandering encamp- 
ments, with vast herds of cattle, and flocks of 
sheep and goats, were of later origin. 

Cain built a city, Gen. 4:17. It was six 
generations later that Jabal introduced tents. 

Noah and his sons began the world anew as 
husbandmen. After the confusion of languages 
and the wide prevalence of idolatry, tribes and 
families of men appear to have wandered away 
from their kind, and to have degenerated into 



PENTATEUCH. 49 



the savage state. From heathenism there is 
but a step to positive barbarism. 

When men depart from the law of God, and 
have no rule of action but their own weak 
views of right and wrong, there is no security 
that they will retain the moral virtues or even 
the necessary arts and comforts of life. 



PELEG. 



Peleg was the son of Eber ; and his name, 
which signifies division, was given to him in 
reference to a noted event that occurred dur- 
ing his life, and probably under his direction. 

" In his days was the earth divided. " Gen. 
10:25. 

Some suppose that the earth was at that time 
distributed by divine appointment to the three 
sons of Noah and their descendants: Asia to 
Shem, Africa to Ham, and the isles of Chittim, 
which comprehended all that was then known 
of Europe, to Japheth. 

Others infer that there was at this period a 
general scattering of tribes and families over 
the earth, consequent upon the variety of dia- 
lects that had been introduced at Babel, and 



50 BIBLE STUDIES. 

that Peleg was the leader of some large emi- 
grating colony. 

Who was Nimrod? 

He is generally reckoned the first king, the 
first chief who engaged in war, and a leader in 
building the tower of Babel. The Bible says 
he founded a kingdom, and was " a mighty one 
on the earth; a mighty hunter before the 
Lord." This does not assert any thing crimi- 
nal, but his name signifies rebellion, and it is 
supposed that he hunted men as well as wild 
beasts, and flourished by violence and plunder. 

His kingdom lay in the land of Shinar, 
where he built Babylon. He is supposed also 
to have founded the city of Nineveh. This 
opinion is supported by the marginal transla- 
tion of the passage, " Out of that land went 
forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh." Gen. 
10:9. According to the margin it reads, 
" Out of that land he (Nimrod) went forth into 
Assyria and builded Nineveh." 



THE TOWER OF BABEL. 

When men grew bold and multiplied, 
" Come, let us build a tower I" they cried, 



PENTATEUCH. 



51 




" A temple which to heaven shall go ; 
A city, our renown to show. 
Come on ! We '11 gather into one, 
All nations underneath the sun." 

So Nimrod's tower, on Shinar's plain, 
Rose step by step, the skies to gain ; 
High walls, and palaces of pride, 
Grew daily on the river's side. 
Nimrod, or Bel, they called their god, 
And thought not of Jehovah's rod. 



52 BIBLE STUDIES. 



But He their rage and folly knew ; 
Confusion in their midst he threw. 
Apart their thoughts and language ran ; 
Confounded was the pride of man : 
Divergent flowed the sundered throngs, 
And sowed the world with babbling tongues. 



What was the one language spoken before the confu- 
sion of tongues ? 

Hebrew, or Syriac, which were originally 
the same. It is thought that all the languages 
now existing in the world can be traced to 
this. 

"Where was the Tower of Babel situated ? 

On the plain by the river Euphrates, where 
the mighty city of Babylon was afterwards 
built. The lofty temple of Belus, the ruins of 
which are still to be seen, is supposed to have 
been erected by Nebuchadnezzar on the founda- 
tion of the tower of Babel. 

What was there wrong in building a city and a tower ? 

The wrong lay in the impious object of the 
builders. The tower may have been designed 
as a temple for the worship of the sun, or some 
false god, and the city was to be the great cen- 
tre of this idolatrous worship. 



PENTATEUCH. 53 



Who was Terah? 

A patriarch of the line of Sheni, who dwelt 
in " Ur of the Chaldees." 

Ur was a city of Mesopotamia, beyond the 
river Euphrates. 

All the inhabitants of this land, and Terah, 
probably among the rest, worshipped the sun, 
moon, and stars, or bowed down to idols which 
their own hands had made. Terah had three 
sons, Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Haran was 
the father of Lot. 



ABRAM OR ABRAHAM. 

God chose Abraham to be his servant and 
friend. He commanded him to leave his native 
land, his home, and friends, and remove to an 
unknown country whither he would lead and 
guide him. 

This is known as the " call of Abraham." 

Abraham obeyed God: Terah his father 
went with him ; and they took also Lot the son 
of Haran, Haran being dead ; but they left Na- 
hor and his family behind. 

At a place called Haran or Cliarran, as in 
Acts 7 : 2, they tarried several years, and there 
Terah died. 

5* 



54 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Christians, like Abraham, are called by God 
to leave the things that are seen, for those that 
are not seen. Like him they trust God, look- 
ing for a heavenly country, and hoping for the 
glory not yet revealed. 1 John 3 : 2. 



" Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your 
fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in 
old time, even Terah the father of Abraham 
and the father of Nahor ; and they served other 
gods." Josh. 24 : 2. 

"By faith Abraham, when he was called to 
go out into a place which he should after re- 
ceive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went 
out, not knowing whither he went." Heb. 
11 :8. 



The call of Abraham was about midway be- 
tween the creation and the birth of Christ. 



CHANGE OF NAME. 
How does Abram differ in signification from Abraham ? 
Abram means a high father. 
Abraham signifies the father of many, or of a 
multitude. 



PENTATEUCH. 55 



This change in his name was made by God 
himself, as a token that the divine promise 
which had been given him that he should be 
the father of many nations would certainly be 
fulfilled. 

God entered into covenant with Abraham, 
and gave to him circumcision, as a token of 
that covenant. Gen. 17 :2, 9-11. 



ABRAHAM IN CANAAN. 

Abraham had never more any fixed habita- 
tion. He was a stranger and a pilgrim in the 
land of promise, often removing from one place 
to another. Wherever he pitched his tent, he 
raised an altar and worshipped God. 

The Lord Jehovah often appeared to him in 
dreams and visions, or met him as an angel, or 
in the form of man, and conversed with him as 
friend to friend. 



ABRAHAM'S FAITH. 
Abraham stands above all other men in the 
greatness of his faith. It is this which makes 
his name illustrious. He is called the father 
of the faithful. 



56 BIBLE STUDIES. 

True faith will be known by its fruits: it 
cannot exist without being fruitful. Its fruit 
is obedience. Faith is accounted by God as 
righteousness. 



ABIMELECH AND PHARAOH. 

When Abraham sojourned in Gerar, the name 
of the king was Abimelech, and that of his chief 
captain, Phichol. 

When Isaac went to Gerar, which was at 
least ninety years later, the king and his chief 
officer bore the same names. They were prob- 
ably names attached to the rank and office 
which they bore. 

In like manner Pharaoh was the common name 
or title of the kings of Egypt. There are four of 
this name mentioned in the writings of Moses. 

1. One who was king in the time of Abraham. 

2. The king who made Joseph his prime 
minister. 

3. One that reigned afterwards, " that knew 
not Joseph. 77 

4. The one that perished in the Red sea. 
Several others are mentioned in the later 

scriptures. 



PENTATEUCH. 57 



REHEARSAL. 

Nine generations after Shem, 
Lived Terah, in Chaldean L T r ; 

The branches issuing from his stem, 
Were Abram, Haran, and Nahor : . 

A son named Lot was Haran's heir, 

And Nahor's wife was Milcah fair. 

But God took Abram from the rest ; 

He called him, led him by the hand : 
With blessings him he richly blest, 

And brought him into Canaan's land ; 
With Sarah, that beloved name, 
And Lot, his brother's son, he came. 

To Abram and his seed alone, 

The glorious promises were made ; 

On him the unborn Saviour shone ; 
The unwrit gospel he surveyed. 

In joyful hope Christ's day to see, 

May every heart an Abraham be. 



CANAAN PROMISED TO THE SEED OF 
ABRAHAM. 

" For all the land which thou seest, to thee 
will I give it, and to thy seed for ever." Gen. 
13:15. 



58 BIBLE STUDIES. 

This promise was a covenant, Gen. 17 : 7, 
and implies a stipulation on the part of Abra- 
ham to obey the command of God, " Walk be- 
fore me, and be thou perfect. 7 ' 

The literal fulfilment of God's covenant with 
Abraham has been forfeited by his descendants. 
The children of disobedience have no claim to 
the promises. 

When God's ancient but revolted people 
shall be restored to his favor, and with the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles brought into the kingdom 
of Christ, it will be by the unmerited grace of 
God through the Mediator of a better covenant. 



WAR. 
The first battle mentioned in Scripture, is 
that of the four kings against five in the vale 
of Siddim. Many wars had undoubtedly raged 
upon the earth ; for men were wicked, nations 
were corrupt, and " the earth was filled with 
violence." 



ANCIENT KINGDOMS. 
The bounds of early kingdoms appear to 
have been very limited. Here are five kings 



PENTATEUCH. 59 



mentioned who reigned in the vale of Siddim ; 
that is, as many kings as cities. Other histories 
concur with Scripture in representing ancient 
kings as being for the most part petty chiefs or 
heads of tribes. 



"All these were joined together in the vale 
of Siddim, which is the salt sea." Gen. 14 : 3. 

Low in the Dead sea lies concealed 
Earth's first recorded battle-field. 
There let it lie. Woe, woe the thought, 
That man with man hath ever fought ! 
Then, Siddim's vale was broad and green, 
With five fair towns to grace the scene ; 
But Elarn's king, of pompous name, 
With all his conquering allies came. 
Four kings their armies onward led ; 
Five kings against them banners spread. 
First battle ! Would it had been last. 
Since then, how oft the warrior's blast, 
The clash of arms, the fiery flood, 
Have scarred the earth with fields of blood ! 

Oh, happy future, when no more 
Shall sound on earth the battle's roar ; 
When rapturous music, soft and sweet, 
Shall flow, as neighboring nations meet ; 



60 BIBLE STUDIES. 

When hate, fear, tumult, all shall cease, 
The watchword of mankind be peace : 
Peace be to those who meet or part ; 
Peace to the passions, and the heart ; 
And every friendly greeting be, 
" Peace to the world ; peace, peace to thee !" 



MELCHIZEDEK. 

"And Melchizeclek king of Salem brought 
forth bread and wine; and he was the priest 
of the most high God. 77 Gen. 14 : 18. 

Abraham has recovered his nephew Lot and 
all his people and goods from the enemy, and 
is returning home with his servants triumphant, 
but faint and weary with the march. 

He is passing by the city of Salem, and lo, 
the king comes forth to meet him, bringing 
bread and wine to refresh him and his follow- 
ers. Abraham gratefully accepts the proffered 
bounty, and as a tribute due to the priestly 
office of the king, presents him with a tenth of 
all the spoil he had taken from the enemy. 
Melchizedek then invokes the blessing of God 
upon Abraham, and they separate. 

What a beautiful and majestic incident. 



PENTATEUCH. 61 



The mutual respect manifested, the courtesy 
and generosity of the king, the gratitude and 
deep sense of religious obligation displayed by 
the patriarch, and the solemn parting benedic- 
tion, combine to make the scene peculiarly in- 
teresting. The elevated simplicity of the scrip- 
ture style adds yet more to the effect. 

This " priest of the most high God " breaks 
forth upon us like light out of darkness, show- 
ing that amid the corrupt inhabitants of Ca- 
naan there was a remnant that retained the 
knowledge and worship of the true God. 

This single interview with Abraham com- 
prises all that is revealed to us in the Old Tes- 
tament of the life of Melchizedek. Nothing is 
recorded of his ancestry or his descendants, nor 
of his history either before or after this event. 

His majestic appearance in the hour of need, 
his righteous character, and the high offices that 
he executed, render him an illustrious type of 
Christ. Heb. 7. 



HIS NAME AND KINGDOM. 
The name Melchizedek signifies king of right- 
eousness, which serves both for the title and 
the character of this kingly priest. 

Bh Stiu\ 6 



62 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Salem, where he dwelt, denotes peace, which 
is undoubtedly descriptive of his wise and gen- 
tle reign. It is supposed to be the same city 
that was afterwards in possession of the Jebu- 
sites and called Jebus; but when taken by 
David and made the capital of his kingdom, 
was named Jerusalem. 



At what period of the world's history were Sodom 
and Gomorrah destroyed? 

Four hundred and fifty years after the del- 
uge ; one hundred years after the death of Noah. 



LOT. 

How was Lot saved ? 

By the assistance of angels, who came to him 
in the guise of strangers, or travellers. 

They warned him of his danger, and aided 
him in his flight. 

In like manner, we believe that at the hour 
of death good men are assisted and comforted 
by angels. They are borne on angels 7 wings 
from a wicked world to a land of everlasting 
joy and safety. 



PENTATEUCH. 63 



LOTS WIFE. 

What was the sin of Lot's wife? 

She looked back. 

Was this all ? Does not this looking back imply an 
intention of turning back ? 

The crime of Lot's wife was similar to that 
of Eve, disobedience — the sin that brought ruin 
on mankind. 

She looked back, and was struck dead on the 
spot. Unbelief led her to this dreadful end. 
She did not believe what God by his angels 
had declared — that the danger was so immi- 
nent, destruction so sure. 

Is it so perilous to look back when our faces 
are Zion-ward? Then let us forget the things 
that are behind, and " press toward the mark 
for the prize of the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus." Phil. 3 : 14. 



"As it was in the days of Lot: they did eat, 
they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, 
they builded. 

"But the same day that Lot went out of 
Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, 
and destroyed them all. 



64 BIBLE STUDIES. 

" Even thus shall it be in the day when the 
Son of man shall be revealed." 

" Remember Lot's wife. 77 Luke 17 : 28-32. 



" Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, 
which the Lord overthrew. 77 Deut. 29 : 23. 

Those cities fell : God laid them low ; 
His righteous anger dealt the blow. 
From heaven came down a fiery rain, 
A thundering tempest swept the plain ; 
The sulphurous lightnings darting round, 
With loosened floods tore up the ground, 
Destroyed the valley far and wide, 
And towns and turrets swept aside, 

Man, art, and nature passed away — 
In heaps the blasted ruins lay ; 
With salt and sulphur crusted o'er, 
Along the salt sea's dismal shore. 



HAGAR THE EGYPTIAN. 

The connection of Abraham with Hagar was 
a secondary marriage which was considered 
lawful in those days. No express prohibition 
of polygamy had been given : but " from the 
beginning it was not so. 77 



PENTATEUCH. 65 



Christianity has restored the marriage insti- 
tution to its original purity and simplicity, 
showing that to be blameless, a man must be 
" the husband of one wife," " and they twain 
shall be one flesh." 



THE ANGEL OF THE LORD. 

" And the angel of the Lord found her by a 
fountain of water in the wilderness, in the way 
toShur." Gen. 16:7. 

This is the first mention of an angel in Scrip- 
ture. The word means simply a messenger: 
but it is usually applied to a divine messenger, 
one of a superior order of beings employed on 
the earth as ministering spirits. 

Often when the term is used in Scripture, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Angel of the covenant, 
is intended. This is evidently the case in the 
present instance. The angel speaks in the first 
person, " I will multiply thy seed exceedingly ;" 
and Hagar bestows a hallowed name upon the 
place in commemoration of the divine vision 
with which she had been favored, "Beer-lahai- 
roi, Thou God seest me." 

6* 



66 BIBLE STUDIES. 

ABRAHAM'S TRIAL. 

What was the severest trial of Abraham's faith? 

Had he at this time any son but Isaac ? 

Who gave the command ? 

Did he assign any reason for requiring this astonish- 
ing sacrifice? 

Where was it to be accomplished ? 

How far did Abraham proceed in obedience to this 
command ? 

How was his purpose arrested? 

What offering was substituted in the place of Isaac ? 

This wonderful trial was not designed solely 
to illustrate the faith of Abraham. It was the 
purpose of God to furnish the patriarch and his 
descendants with a lively representation of the 
atoning sacrifice of Christ. " God so loved the 
world " etc. John 3 : 16. 



SONS OF ABRAHAM. 

1. Isaac, the child of promise, whose mother 
was Sarah. 

A hundred years had Abraham walked the earth, 
And Sarah nine times ten at Isaac's birth ; 
Rejoicing then, they wondered at the prize, 
The promised child that blest their aged eyes. 

2. Ishmael, the Arab, or wild man, whose 
mother was Hagar the bondwoman. 



PENTATEUCH. 



67 







DESERT CHIEFS. 



In Paran's desert wild he ran, 
At enmity with God and man. 
An archer bold in heart and hand, 
By fighting he possessed the land. 
His wife was an Egyptian dame : 
Twelve princes from the union came. 

3. Six sons, whose mother was Keturah. 
Know ye the names of the sons of Keturah ? 
Zimran and Jokshan, Ishbak and Shuah, 



68 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Madan and Midian — all chiefs in their stations, 
The lords of the desert, and fathers of nations. 



ISHMAEL. 



" And God was with the lad ; and he grew, 
and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an 
archer." Gen. 21 : 20. 

hat people have descended from Ishmael 

His immediate descendants were known as 
Ishmaelites, Hagarenes, etc. He is supposed 
to be the ancestor of the wandering tribes of 
Arabia Deserta, known as Bedawins, and in 
general of the Arab race. 

In the character and fortunes of his descend- 
ants, the prophecy respecting Ishmael has been 
remarkably fulfilled. 

" He will be a wild man ; his hand will be 
against every man, and every man's hand against 
him : and he shall dwell in the presence of all 
his brethren." Gen. 16 : 12. 

They have always been a wild ferocious peo- 
ple, hostile to all other nations, often assailed, 
but never subdued, and still retaining in a great 
measure their independence. 

The Arabs, like the Jews, are standing wit- 



PENTATEUCH. 



69 



nesses of the truth of prophecy, and the divine 
inspiration of the Scriptures. 



CAYE OF MACHPELAH. 

Abraham, though 
he owned no land 
in Canaan, was re- 
garded as a great 
and honorable 
man, a ruler, and 
a prince. He had 
three hundred and 
eighteen men-ser- 
vants fit to bear 
arms ; and these 
with their families 
and his numerous 
flocks and herds, 




SEPULCHRE HEWN FROM A ROCK. 



formed a large en- 
campment. He dwelt many years on the plain 
of Mamre, at Hebron, and this appears to have 
been his favorite place of abode. It is sup- 
posed that his tent was placed within the 
shadow of a large and noted tree, of the tur- 
pentine species; for the word Mamre, Gen. 



70 BIBLE STUDIES. 



13 : 8, signifies the terebinth, or turpentine- 
tree. 

When Sarah died, Abraham bought the field 
of Machpelah, which was near his encampment 
at Hebron, for a burial place. In this field 
was a cave, or sepulchre, hewn in the rock, in 
which Sarah was buried. 

Sarah is the only woman whose age is men- 
tioned in Scripture. 

How old was she, and where did she die ? 

What six persons were, in the course of time, laid in 
the sepulchre of Machpelah ? 



See Gen. 49 : 31 ; 50 : 13. 



MONEY. 



The purchase of the cave of Machpelah is 
the first money transaction recorded in the his- 
tory of the world. 

"Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver 
which he had named in the audience of the sons 
of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current 
money with the merchant. 77 Gen. 23 : 16. 

It is evident that these shekels were not 
coined money, but pieces of silver estimated by 



PENTATEUCH. U 



weight. The Jewish shekel was not originally 
a coin, but a weight of about half an ounce. 

The particular form of the pieces used in 
merchandise before coinage was introduced, is 
uncertain. In most cases they were probably 
mere lumps. The Egyptians had them wrought 
into the form of rings. 

The Jewish shekel appears not to have been 
coined until after the return of the nation from 
the captivity in Babylon. The specimens of 
the shekel now extant are very nearly the size 
of a half dollar. 



THE MARRIAGE OF ISAAC. 

Abraham being advanced in years, called 
his eldest servant that ruled over all that he 
had, and bound him by a solemn oath that he 
should not take a wife for Isaac from the Ca- 
naanites among whom he dwelt, who were 
idolaters; but should seek her among Abra- 
ham's kindred in Mesopotamia. 

" The Lord God of heaven, which took me 
from my father's house, and from the land of 
my kindred, and which spake unto me, and 
sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I 
give this land ; he shall send his angel before 



72 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my sou 
from them. 

"And the servant put his hand under the 
thigh of Abraham his master, and swear to him 
concerning that matter." 

Abraham therefore sent him forth with costly 
presents, and a train of ten camels, many days 7 
journey eastward, into Chaldea, his native coun- 
try, to the residence of his brother Nahor, to 







WELL SCENE. 



propose the marriage of Isaac with one of the 
daughters of his family. 



PENTATEUCH. 73 



He arrives at the place towards evening, and 
reposing himself by a well of water, a little 
without the city, offers a silent prayer to God 
that the damsel whom the divine counsels have 
appointed to be the wife of Isaac, may come 
forth with her pitcher, and draw water for the 
refreshment of himself and his camels. God 
by his providence accomplished the desire of 
the servant. Even while he was yet speaking 
in his heart, a young maiden named Rebekah 
came forth to draw water from the well. The 
circumstances of the interview corresponded 
exactly to the faithful servant's petition. 

This is a remarkable instance of an immedi- 
ate and circumstantial answer to prayer. It is 
also a beautiful illustration of the doctrine of 
a special providence. 



Who was Rebekah ? 

She was the daughter of Bethuel, one of the 
sons of Nahor. Her mother was Milcah, and 
her brother, Laban. Isaac and Bethuel were 



cousms-german. 



Rebekah shows great courage and decision 
of character. She is asked to leave her own 

Bib. Stud. 7 



n 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




l:.^r^ J f''^^' 



CAMELS TRAVELLING. 



people and her father's house, to go with stran- 
gers to a far country, which is to be her future 
home, and where she is to enter into new rela- 
tions in an unknown family. Yet without 
hesitation she says, " I will go." She knew that 
Isaac was a servant of the only true God. 
Therefore she did not fear to go where God 
seemed to call. With suitable attendants she 
went forth under the care of Abraham's ser- 



PENTATEUCH. 83 



Though Rachel . may have cherished at first 
a lurking veneration for the teraphim of her 
father, yet, at a subsequent period, under the 
teaching of the patriarch, his whole family ap- 
pears to have been entirely purified from the 
tendency to image-worship, and other relics of 
Chaldean superstition which they brought with 
them from Haran. When Jacob erected an 
altar at Bethel, and established the public wor- 
ship of Jehovah, his household surrendered to 
him "all their strange gods," and other memo- 
rials of idolatry, and he privately buried them 
in some unknown place in Shechein. Gen. 
35:4. 



VISION OF ANGELS. 

While Jacob was travelling homeward with 
his little family, angels were hovering round 
him to keep him from harm. God opened his 
eyes, that he might see this and be encouraged. 

Scripture records this wonderful vision in 
two short verses, but they are full of meaning, 
and the language is simple and pure. 

"And Jacob went on his way, and the angels 
of God met him." 



84 BIBLE STUDIES. 

" And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is 
God's host; and he called the name of that 
place Mahanaim." Gen. 32 : 12. 

Mahanaim signifies two hosts; the angels ap- 
pearing in two camps or bands. Jacob had 
seen a ladder of angels in his dream at Bethel, 
when he was leaving home ; and now on his 
return, two bands of these heavenly messengers 
are sent to cheer and protect him on his way. 

Every good man has a guard of angels. 
When about to leave this world for a heavenly 
country, the angels of God meet him and bear 
him to his Saviour's feet. 

" Are they not all ministering spirits?" Heb. 
1:14. 

" The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 
Psa. 34 : 7. 

"For he shall give his angels charge over 
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways." Psa. 91 : 11. 

The angel guards that keep heaven's gate, 
Scarce for the pilgrim's knocking wait, 
Ere they the portal wide expand, 
And on the golden threshold stand; 
While tides of rapturous music roll, 
To welcome home the ransomed soul. 



PENTATEUCH. 85 



JACOB BECOMES ISRAEL. 

Jacob was now about to enter the land of 
Canaan, when he was told that his brother 
Esau was coming forth to meet him, with an 
army of four hundred men. 

Was he coming in wrath to take vengeance upon Jacob 
for his former offences against him ? 

So Jacob feared ; and he prayed earnestly to 
God, saying, 

" Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of 
my brother, from the hand of Esau ; for I fear 
him, lest he will come and smite me, and the 
mother with the children. 77 

Then Jacob selected from his flocks and 
herds several droves, numbering in the whole, 
five hundred and fifty animals, among which 
were thirty camels with their young offspring, 
and sent them forward as a gift to appease the 
wrath and soften the heart of Esau. He com- 
manded the keeper of every drove, when he 
should meet his brother, to say in humble and 
respectful terms, 

" These are a present to my lord Esau, from 
his servant Jacob. 77 

That night Jacob sent his family and flocks 
over the brook Jabbok, into the land of Ca- 



86 BIBLE STUDIES. 

naan. This little stream was the boundary of 
Canaan on that side. 

Jacob himself remained alone on the other 
side of the brook. 

What wonderful and mysterious event took place that 
night? 

Jacob wrestled until the breaking of the day 
with a divine Being in the form of man. 

Was this a spiritual, or bodily wrestling? 

Was it not both? 

It was fervent effectual prayer ; and it was 
also a single combat, hand to hand, as man 
wrestles with man, for Jacob's thigh was out 
of joint from the powerful touch of him who 
wrestled with him. 

Before the divine Being departed, he said to 
Jacob, 

"Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, 
but Israel ; for as a prince hast thou power with 
God, and hast prevailed." 

The name Israel, signifies a prince of God. 

The name Jacob, signifies a supplanter, or one 
who takes the place of another, as Jacob did 
that of Esau. 

Jacob called the name of the place where he 
had wrestled Peniel, for he said, 



PENTATEUCH. Si 



" I have seen God face to face, and my life is 
preserved." 

The word Peniel, signifies the face of God. 



ISRAELITES, HEBREWS, JEWS. 

One of the names by which the descendants 
of Abraham are known, is derived from Israel. 
They are called Israelites, when considered as 
the chosen people of God. It is their covenant 
name. They are also called Hebrews : in this 
term there is no special reference to their re- 
ligion. In modern times they are most fre- 
quently called Jews ; this term, like Judea, 
their country, is derived from Juclah, the most 
distinguished of the twelve tribes. 



THE INTERVIEW. 

How will the brothers Esau and Jacob meet? 
They have been separated for twenty years. 
During that period Jacob has been an exile 
from his native land, through fear of Esau. 
And now the latter comes forth to meet him in 
hostile array. 

But has not Jacob been encouraged to return by com* 
munications from God ; and is not this a pledge of safety? 

Yes : God will protect him. 



88 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




Jacob is at the head of his household ; Esau 
at the head of his army. Will the warrior 
meet the exile as an eagle pouncing upon his 
prey ; or, like a noble-minded man that comes 
forth to meet a friend after long absence ? 

See with what gravity, ceremony, and cour- 
tesy the affair is managed. As they draw 
near to each other, Jacob leaves his family a 
little behind, and advances towards his brother 
in a slow, respectful manner, with his eyes on 
the ground, pausing at intervals, and bowing 
himself seven times. The reception that Esau 
gives him is more than peaceful; it is welcome 
and affectionate. 



PENTATEUCH. 89 



" And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced 
him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him ; and 
they wept. 77 

We are left to suppose that this reconcilia- 
tion was sincere and lasting. The brothers 
settled in different countries on account of the 
largeness of their possessions, and their differ- 
ent modes of life ; but an intercourse of a 
friendly nature appears to have been main- 
tained between them. 

Esau dwelt in mount Seir. Edom is another 
name of Esau, and his country obtained the 
name of Idumea. Jacob dwelt in the land of 
Canaan, the land wherein Abraham and Isaac 
sojourned as strangers. 



WIVES AND SONS OF JACOB. 

From Jacob — classed by the maternal name 
In varied bands — twelve mighty princes came. 



SONS OF LEAH. 



Four chiefs descend from Leah, each a tower : 
Reuben and Simeon, sons of Jacob's power ; 
Levi and Judah, names of high renown, 
To whom pertain the priesthood and the crown. 



90 BIBLE STUDIES. 

SIGNIFICATION OF NAMES. 

Reuben - See, a son ! 

Simeon Hearing. 

Levi Joined. 

Judah Praise. 

The feminine of Judah is Judith. 



SONS OF BILHAH AND ZILPAH. 

Bilhah and Zilpah, each with princes twain, 
Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, swell the train. 

Dan Judgment. 

Naphtali Wrestlings. 

Gad A troop. 

Asher Happy. 

ADDITIONAL SONS OF LEAH. 

Lo, Issachar and Zebulon, two more, 
Whom Leah adds to her preceding four. 

Issachar A hive. 

Zebulon Dwelling. 

SONS OF RACHEL. 

See Rachel last, with Joseph in her hand, 
And Benjamin, the youngest of the band. 



PENTATEUCH. 91 



Joseph Adding. 

Benjamin Son of the right hand. 



Where did Jacob find his father Isaac? 

How old was Isaac when he died? 

By whom was he buried ? 

" And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto 
Mamre, unto the city of Arba, which is He- 
bron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned. 

" And the days of Isaac were a hundred and 
fourscore years. 

" And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and 
was gathered unto his people, being old and 
full of days ; and his sons Esau and Jacob 
buried him." Gen. 35 : 27-29. 



JOSEPH, THE FAVORITE SON. 

Joseph was born when Jacob his father was 
ninety-one years of age. His father loved him 
more than he did his other children, not merely 
because he was the son of his old age, but for a 
better reason, he was more worthy to be loved 
than they. 

Joseph feared God, and conducted towards 
his aged father with reverence and honor. 

He was often employed with his older breth- 



92 BIBLE STUDIES. 

ren in feeding and tending the flocks ; but he 
had no fellowship with their wickedness, and 
faithfully reported to his father their evil deeds 
and sayings. For this they hated him. 

Jacob, in his love for his young son, made 
him a robe or coat of many colors. This was 
an ornamental garment that distinguished him 
above his brethren, and still further excited 
their hatred. They could not even speak to 
him without showing their anger and dislike. 

At a certain time, Joseph dreamed that he 
and his brothers were binding sheaves of corn 
in the field, and behold, the sheaves of his 
brothers stood round, and bowed low in rever- 
ence to Joseph's sheaf. 

Another time he dreamed that the sun, moon, 
and stars, which in this case represented his 
father, mother, and brethren, bowed to the 
ground before him, and hailed him their lord 
and master 

These dreams foretold the future greatness 
of Joseph. In the simplicity of his heart, he 
related them to his brethren, and they hated 
him yet more. His father also rebuked him, 
lest he should cherish lofty and unbecoming 
expectations of future glory. 



PENTATEUCH. 93 

All dreams are not prophetic. In general, 
the broken and confused images that float 
through the mind in sleep, have no connection 
with our duty, or with future events. But in 
ancient times, God sometimes spoke to men in 
dreams ; yet never without some special de- 
sign, or end in view. 



JOSEPH CAST INTO THE PIT. 

Jacob was at this time cwelling at Hebron 
with his father ; for Isaac was not yet dead. 
The sons of Jacob often went with the flocks 
and herds to distant parts of the country for 
pasturage. Once, when they had been long 
absent with the flocks at Shechem, Jacob said 
to Joseph, " Go, I pray thee ; see whether it be 
well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks, 
and bring me word again. " 

Shechem was about sixty miles from Hebron. 
Jacob had dwelt there when he first came into 
Canaan with his family, and bought a piece of 
ground. Joseph went forth to look for his 
brethren, and sought them at this place, but 
found them not. They had removed to a more 
distant part of the land. " A certain man" 
found him wandering in the country, and told 



94 BIBLE STUDIES. 

him what course they had taken. He followed 
the directions of the kind stranger, and found 
his brethren feeding their flocks at Dothan, 
which is near mount Gilboa. 

His brethren saw him coming afar off. They 
were probably upon high ground, and Joseph 
was conspicuous by the bright colors of his 
coat. Before he mie near, they consulted to- 
gether, saying, it 

"Behold, thisjpreamer cometh. Let us slay 
him, and cast him into some pit ; and we will 
say, Some evil beast hath devoured him ; and 
we shall see what will become of his dreams." 

One of Joseph's brethren, Reuben the first- 
born, would not consent to the murder of his 
innocent young brother ; and in order to save 
his life, he said to the others, 

"Let us not kill him. Shed no blood, but 
cast him into this pit in the wilderness. 77 

Reuben designed in his heart, when the party 
had left the place, to return privately, take 
Joseph out of the pit, and hasten away with 
him to his father. 

So when Joseph came to his- brethren, they 
stripped him of the beautiful garments in which 
his father had clothed him, and dragged him to 



PENTATEUCH. 



95 



the pit. He besought them with tears and 
cries and great anguish of soul, to spare him, 
but they had no mercy. They cast him into 
the pit, and all, except Reubln, sat down to 
their ordinary repast, as if n*> crime had been 
committed, and nothing uncommon, had oc- 
curred. 



JOSEPH SOLD INTO EGYPT. 

Joseph was left in the pit ; but 

| not alone, for God was with him. 

The Almighty, in whom he 

had put his trust, would not 




96 BIBLE STUDIES. 



leave him to perish in that dark and dismal 
place. Even then the way was preparing for 
his escape. 

Just at the right moment a company of trav- 
elling merchants came in sight. These were 
Ishmaelites and Midianites, laden with costly 
gums and spices, which they were bearing from 
Gilead to Egypt for sale. 

Judah, one of the brethren whose heart re- 
lented towards Joseph, said to the others, 
" Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and 
let not our hand be upon him ; for he is our 
brother and our flesh. 77 To this they agreed. 
So they drew him out of the pit, and sold him 
to the merchants for twenty pieces of silver. 

Eeuben was absent, and knew not that Jo- 
seph had been sold. He goes to the pit in 
order to release him from confinement. He 
calls, but he receives no answer. " Behold, 
Joseph was not in the pit. 77 Overcome with 
sorrow, he rushes into the presence of his 
brethren, rending his garment and exclaiming, 

"The child is not; and I, whither shall I 
go? 77 Gen. 37:29, 30. 

Reuben was thinking of his aged father. He 
had hoped to deliver Joseph safe into his hands, 



PENTATEUCH. 91 



and lie could not bear the thought of witness- 
ing the grief of his venerable parent at the loss 
of his beloved son. 

But the other brethren took the beautiful 
coat of Joseph, dipped it in the blood of a goat, 
and sent it to Jacob, saving that they had 
found this garment, and he could see for him- 
self whether it was the one that had belonged 
to his son or not. 

Jacob knew the coat well, and believed that 
some wild beast of the desert had attacked 
Joseph, and devoured him. He mourned and 
lamented many days, and even at last refused 
to be comforted, saying, 

" I will go down into the grave unto my son 
mourning.' 7 

Jacob was at this time one hundred and 
eight years of age, and Joseph seventeen. 

Isaac was yet living, but nearly one hundred 
and eighty years old. 



JOSEPH, A TYPE. 

Of whom does Joseph, beloved by his father, but hated 
by his brethren, remind us ? 

What other transaction resembles the selling of Joseph 
by his brethren, for twenty pieces of silver ? 

Bib Stud. 9 



98 BIBLE STUDIES. 

JOSEPH A SERVANT. 

The Midianites carried Joseph to Egypt and 
sold him to an officer of Pharoah the king, 
named Potiphar. Joseph, as a servant, was 
faithful to the duties of his station. He feared 
God, and the blessing of God was with him, 
making all that he did to prosper in his hand. 
His master, observing his skill ai\d discretion, 
made him overseer of his house, and all his 
estate. 

The wife of Potiphar was an artful, corrupt 
woman, who tried to allure Joseph to become 
a companion of her wicked ways. But Joseph 
resisted the temptation, and steadily refused to 
participate in her guilt, saying, 

"How can I do this great wickedness, and 
sin against God ?" What a bright example is 
here displayed of wisdom and piety. When 
exposed to great temptations, let us remember 
Joseph, and say as he did, 

" How can I do this great wickedness, and 
sin against God ?" 

The wife of Potiphar was an idolater, and 
not a worshipper of the true God. She was 
hardened in sin, and to be revenged upon Jo- 
seph, accused him falsely to his master. Poti- 



PEXTATEUCH. 99 

phar believed her falsehoods, and caused Jo- 
seph to be cast into the king's prison, where he 
was bound with iron chains. 

" Whose feet they hurt with fetters." Psa. 
105 : 18. 



No dungeon deep can shut out light 

That in the bosom burns : 
Far inward, by that candle bright, 

The soul its God discerns. 

And hearts bound upward to their God, 

No fetters can detain ; 
Warm, swift as an electric rod, 

Prayer melts away the chain. 



JOSEPH IN PRISON. 

Joseph had done no wrong. The presence 
of God was with him still. The faith and hope 
that he cherished in his heart, shed a cheering 
light through the darkness of the dungeon. 

After a time the keeper of the prison re- 
leased him from his chains, and made him not 
only his steward, but treated him as a friend. 
He intrusted the other prisoners, and all affairs 
within the walls of the prison, to his manage- 
ment. Joseph, though in a strange land, and 



100 BIBLE STUDIES. 



deprived of his liberty, finds even here an op- 
portunity to do good ; and what his hand finds 
to do, that he cheerfully performs. 

Joseph had been long a prisoner, when two 
officers of the king's household were thrown, 
for some offence, into the prison, and committed 
to Joseph's charge. They were men of distinc- 
tion, having served as chief butler, and chief 
baker to the king ; that is, they were overseers 
or directors of those persons who supplied the 
royal table with bread and wine. Such officers 
would be much in the king's presence, and be 
often consulted by him. 

After these men had been for some time in 
prison, they were each, in the same night, im- 
pressed with a remarkable dream. Joseph, 
inspired by God, interpreted these dreams. 
That of the chief butler denoted that in three 
days' time he should be restored to his former 
honors; and that of the chief baker signified, 
that in three days' time he should be punished 
by death. 

Joseph then requested the chief butler, when 
he should again stand before the king, to speak 
a kind word for him, and endeavor to obtain 
his release from prison ; adding, 



PENTATEUCH. 101 



" For indeed, I was stolen away out of the 
land of the Hebrews; and here also have I 
done nothing that they should put me into the 
dungeon." 

The dreams of the chief butler and chief baker 
were accomplished according to Joseph's inter- 
pretation ; the former was restored to his post, 
and the latter executed. 

" Yet did not the chief butler remember Jo- 
seph, but forgat him.' 7 

Had he been a kind-hearted man, and grate- 
ful to Joseph for relieving the sadness caused 
by his dream, he would not so soon have for- 
gotten him. But God did not forget Joseph, 
though he suffered him to remain long in prison. 
He would have him wait, that he might try his 
faith and patience. 

" Until the time that his word came, the 
word of the Lord tried him." Psa. 105 : 19. 



PHARAOH'S DREAMS, AND JOSEPH'S 
ADVANCEMENT. 

While Joseph still remained in prison, Pha- 
roah the king had, in one night, two remark- 
able dreams. The obiects that appeared before 

9* 



102 BIBLE STUDIES. 

him in the two dreams were different, but the 
resemblance in other points showed that they 
were of the same import. 

In the first dream, he stood by the river 
Nile, and saw seven fat and well-favored kine 
come up out of the river ; and after them seven 
lean and ill-favored kine, that ate up the first 
seven, and yet remained as lean as before. 

In the second dream, he saw seven ears of 
corn, full and good, growing upon one stalk; 
and after them sprung up seven thin and blasted 
ears, that devoured the seven good ears. 

These dreams were sent by God to warn the 
king of events that were about to take place. 
Therefore they made so deep an impression 
upon his mind, that he could not shake it off. 
His spirit was troubled, and he could find no 
peace till he had learned the hidden meaning 
of his dreams. The magicians and cunning 
men of Egypt could give no explanation of 
them, that satisfied the king's mind. 

Then the chief butler remembered Joseph. 
It recurred to his mind that he had interpreted 
his dream and that of the chief baker, in the 
prison, with wonderful accuracy. In haste, he 
related the whole story to the king, assuring 



PENTATEUCH. 



103 



him that there was a young Hebrew servant in 
the prison that could interpret dreams. 

Joseph is immediately summoned from the 
prison, and arrayed in fitting garments to ap- 
pear before the king. And now the young 
Hebrew bondman, long an inmate of the dun- 
geon, and regarded as a criminal, stands in the 
presence of Pharaoh and his courtiers. 

The king addresses 
Joseph, saying, t; I have 
heard that thou 
canst interpret 
dreams." Jo- 
seph mod- 
estly re- 
plies, "It 
is not in 
me : God 
shall give 
Pharaoh 
an answer 
of peace." 

Pharaoh then relates his dreams : and Jo- 
seph, taught by God, declares that they indi- 
cate years of abundance and years of famine 
that are to come. For seven successive years 




104 BIBLE STUDIES. 

the river Nile would overflow its banks, and 
make the land fertile, so that ample harvests 
would follow. And then for seven successive 
years the river would be restrained ; the former 
plenty be forgotten, and famine would consume 
the land. 

In Egypt, where it seldom rains, the ground 
is watered and enriched by the annual over- 
flow of the river. At the present time, as in 
the days of Joseph, if the streams that descend 
from the higher lands in the interior of the 
continent, do not pour down their customary 
tribute to the Nile, a scanty harvest is sure to 
follow. 

When Joseph had delivered the interpreta- 
tion, he added some words of counsel to the 
king. He recommended him to provide against 
the years of famine, by laying up stores during 
the seven plenteous years, and intimated that 
it was for this purpose that God had showed 
him what he was about to do. 

The king was satisfied with Joseph's inter- 
pretation. He believed that he had spoken by 
the Spirit of God, and that no other person 
could be found who would manage the affairs 
of his kingdom, at this critical period, with so 



PENTATEUCH. 



105 



much wisdom and discretion, as this same He- 
brew bondman. 

After consulting with his servants, the king 
promoted Joseph to the second post of honor 
in the land, making him the actual ruler over 
all Egypt : " Only in the throne, 77 he said, " will 
I be greater than thou. 77 

Then Joseph 
was arrayed 
in costly gar- 
ments, with a 
golden chain 
about his neck, 
and the king 
put his own 
ring (signet, or 
seal) on his 
hand, and caus- 
ed him to ride 
through the city in one of his royal 
chariots, while a band of men went before him 
proclaiming him ruler over the land of Egypt, 
and calling upon all men to bow before him. 
Joseph is now promoted to great honor. 
Is he not worthy of it? How admirable his 
demeanor in the presence of the king ! He was 




106 BIBLE STUDIES. 



gentle, respectful, modest ; but the noblest vir- 
tue that he exhibited was the firmness with 
which he acknowledged the true God, in the 
midst of a great heathen assembly. 



JOSEPH A RULER. 

Joseph was now thirty -years of age; he had 
been thirteen years a servant and a prisoner 
in Egypt. 

The king gave him a new name : 

Zaphnath-paaneah — Revealer of secrets; or, 
as some interpret it, Saviour of the people. 

" He made him lord of his house, and ruler 
of all his substance : 

" To bind his princes at pleasure, and teach 
his senators wisdom. " Psa. 105 : 21, 22. 

Joseph married in Egypt, and had two sons, 

Manasseh Forgetting. 

Ephraim Fruitful. 

The name of his wife was Asenath. 

Joseph governed the kingdom with great 
wisdom. During the years of plenty he pro- 
vided storehouses, into which all the surplus 
grain produced by a succession of abundant 
harvests was gathered. 



PENTATECTCH. 107 



When the years of famine came, and private 
supplies failed, the people came to the grana- 
ries of the king to purchase corn of Joseph. 
The dearth became at last so universal, that 
the whole nation depended on him for food to 
keep them from perishing by hunger. 

The famine extended to other lands, and peo- 
ple came from the neighboring countries to buy 
corn in Egypt. 

Joseph was like the bountiful father of a 
great family, dealing out bread to all his house- 
hold. He was recompensed for all his suffer- 
ings. 

Happy is the man who has it in his power to 
do so much good. 

It is a yet nobler office to dispense the bread 
of life to those who are famishing through the 
want thereof. 



JOSEPH'S EARLY DREAMS FULFILLED. 

While the famine prevailed, a company often 
men came from a far country to buy corn in 
Egypt. When they were brought into the 
presence of Joseph, they bowed themselves be- 
fore him with their faces to the earth. 



108 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




These were Jo-! j!f 
seph's brethren 
they came from j 
Canaan, to pur- 
chase food for j 
their father and ! 
their families, j 
lest they should 
perish with hun- 
ger. 

Joseph knew 
his brethren, though it was more than ^gftiP 
twenty years since he had seen them, 
but they knew not him. How, indeed,* should 
it enter into their thoughts, that the Governor 
of all Egypt was the brother whom they had 
sold for a servant ? 

Joseph asked them many questions, and they 
answered truly, that they were sons of an old 
man in the land of Canaan — that they had 
once been twelve in number, but one was gone, 
and the youngest they had left at home with 
their father. 

But Joseph wished to try them on two points : 
to ascertain whether they had repented of their 
cruelty to him, and whether they had not trans- 



PENTATEUCH. 109 



ferred to Benjamin that envy and hatred which 
they had formerly manifested towards him, and 
from the fatal consequences of which he had 
only escaped by the wonderful interposition of 
God. For Joseph and Benjamin being the 
sons of one mother, the beloved Rachel, were 
both favorites of the father, and therefore 
equally exposed to the jealousy and aversion 
of their older brethren. 

If now Joseph should find that they truly 
loved Benjamin, would it not be a proof that 
their hearts had been softened by divine grace? 
He therefore spoke to them harshly, accusing 
them of being spies, who had entered the coun- 
try with evil designs; and caused them to be 
put under guard, and kept in confinement for 
three days. 

When they were again brought into his pres- 
ence, Joseph proposed to keep one of them 
bound, while the others returned home with 
corn for their families, and then came back 
again, bringing their younger brother with 
them. "So shall your words be verified, and 
ye shall not die. 77 Gen. 42 : 20. 

This unexpected proposition astonished his 
brethren, and made them very sorrowful. It 

Bib. Stud. 10 



110 BIBLE STUDIES. 

was painful to think of leaving one of their 
number in an Egyptian prison, and they knew 
it would rend the heart of their aged father to 
part with his youngest son. 

In their distress, conscience brought to their 
minds the sins of former days. They remem- 
bered their cruel treatment of Joseph, and they 
said one to another, "It is on account of our 
guilt in destroying our brother, that this distress 
is sent upon us ; his blood is surely required at 
our hands : we had no pity for him, and now 
this Egyptian ruler has no mercy for us." 

Joseph understood what they said, for they 
conversed in their own language, not supposing 
that any one near them was acquainted with 
the Hebrew tongue. His heart was moved 
with compassion for their grief and perplexity, 
and he turned from them and wept. 

But he did not relinquish his plans. He 
took Simeon and bound him, as a surety that 
they would return to Egypt, bringing their 
younger brother with them, and then dismissed 
them to their own country, with a large supply 
of corn. He also returned all their money, 
causing his servants to place it, without their 
knowledge, near the mouth of each man's sack. 



PENTATEUCH. Ill 



SECOND YISIT OF JOSEPH'S BRETH- 
REN TO EGYPT. 

When Joseph's brethren gave their father an 
account of what had befallen them in Egypt, 
he was greatly distressed, and refused to let 
Benjamin go to that country with them. In 
his grief, he exclaimed, 

" Ye have bereaved me of my children : Jo- 
seph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take 
Benjamin also." 

" His brother is dead, and he is left alone ; 
if mischief befall him by the way, then shall ye 
bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the 
grave. " 

But the famine continued ; the corn they had 
brought home was, after a time, exhausted, 
and Jacob saw that he must send again to 
Egypt for food, or his whole family would 
perish. Yet his sons durst not venture to go 
without Benjamin. The lord of Egypt had 
solemnly declared, " Ye shall not see my face, 
except your brother be with you." 

Jacob was therefore compelled by necessity 
to let Benjamin go. He gave him into the 
special care of Juclah, who pledged himself to 



112 BIBLE STUDIES. 

return him in safety to his father's arms. Tak- 
ing with them a present of the products of the 
land, balm, honey, spices, and myrrh, and with 
double money in their hands — for they attrib- 
uted its return to them before to some over- 
sight, or mistake — they went down to Egypt, 
and stood again before Joseph. 

They were received at this time with great 
distinction. Instead of being arrested as spies, 
and charged with falsehood and enmity to the 
country, they were welcomed as friends, and 
entertained as princes. Joseph had them con- 
ducted to his own house, where he restored 
Simeon to them, and made many kind inquiries 
respecting their welfare, and that of their 
father. " Is your father well," he said, " the 
old man. of whom ye spake ? is he yet alive ?" 
Then turning towards Benjamin, he asked, 

" Is this your younger brother, of whom ye 
spake unto me ? And he said, God be gracious 
to thee, my son." 

As he spoke, his heart melted into tender- 
ness ; tears began to flow, and hastening from 
their presence, he entered into his chamber 
and wept there. 

After this, Joseph entertained his brethren 



PENTATEUCH. lie 



at a dinner, or feast ; providing for them with 
great hospitality, sending them portions from 
his own table, and so conducting the feast as to 
make them feel at ease, and happy in his com- 
pany. 

" But Benjamin's mess was five times as much 
as any of theirs. 77 

This may either mean so much more in quan- 
tity, or that Joseph distinguished his younger 
brother, by placing before him a greater variety 
of choice and delicate food. 

The next day, with the morning light, they 
made ready to depart. But Joseph had not yet 
proved his brethren sufficiently. Yet another 
trial was in reserve for them. He commanded 
the steward, when he filled their sacks with 
corn, to return all their money as before, and 
to put the silver drinking cup, which he used 
at his table, into the sack of Benjamin. 

This cup the brethren had probably observed 
and admired the day before ; it was wrought 
with mystical figures, and was a kind of cup or 
tankard, called a divining cup, by the supersti- 
tious Egyptians. 

All this was done as Joseph directed, and 
the little company went forth on their journey 



114 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



homeward. 




But they had scarcely left the 
city, before they were pursued and 
overtaken by the steward, who as- 
sailed them with a fierce charge 
of ingratitude and theft, accusing 
them of having stolen the silver cup 



of his master. The men protested their inno- 
cence, and willingly submitted to an examina- 
tion. Great was their astonishment when the 
cup was found in the sack of Benjamin. They 
were exceedingly dismayed, and the whole com- 
pany, sorrowful and perplexed, returned to the 
city. 

When they came again into the presence of 
Joseph, they fell before him to the ground. It 



PENTATEUCH. 115 

would be of no avail to plead their innocence, 
since the cup was found in their possession, and 
they gave themselves up submissively to bond- 
age. " Behold/' they said, " we are my lord's 
servants, both we, and he also with whom the 
cup is found. 77 

But Joseph said, " Not sq ; go in peace to 
your father, all except the one with whom the 
cup is found ; he only shall be my servant. 77 

We may suppose that Joseph designed by this 
severe test to gain a clear insight into the tem- 
per and character of his brethren, that he might 
know whether the Spirit of God had moved 
them to repentance for their former deeds. 

Would they leave Benjamin to his fate, and 
return to their father with intelligence that 
would rend his aged heart with grief? He 
would see ; so he bade all but the criminal " go 
in peace ! 77 

Then Judah arose, and advancing in front of 
the others, related all that had passed between 
them and their father, after their former jour- 
ney to Egypt ; describing the reluctance of the 
old man to part with Benjamin, and his own 
solemn pledge of suretyship for him. He con- 
cluded with an urgent request that he might 



116 BIBLE STUDIES. 

be accepted as the bondman, and Benjamin al- 
lowed to return home with his brethren. 

" For how shall I go up to my father, and 
the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I 
see the evil that shall come on my father." 

When Judah had done speaking, Joseph 
could no longer restrain his feelings. His 
heart yearned towards his brethren, and com- 
manding his Egyptian servants to leave the 
room, he said, 

" I am Joseph your brother ; doth my father 
yet live ?" And he wept aloud ; so that all in 
the house heard. Again he repeated, 

" I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold 
into Egypt." 

These words filled his brethren with amaze- 
ment and fear ; they were troubled at his pres- 
ence, and cut to the heart by the remembrance 
of their former cruelty. They could not answer 
him a word. But Joseph calmed the tumult of 
their thoughts, speaking to them in the most 
endearing manner, and using arguments of con- 
solation, to dispel the painful sense of guilt 
and shame. 

" Be not angry with yourselves," said Joseph, 
" that ye sold me hither. It was God that sent 



PENTATEUCH. 117 



me before you, not only to save you and your 
posterity, but to preserve all Egypt and the 
surrounding country from a great calamity. 
And now," he continued, " haste ye, and return 
to my father, and tell him that God hath made 
his son Joseph lord over all Egypt. And ye 
shall bring him, and all your families, clown 
thither, and I will nourish you during the five 
years of famine yet to come." 

With these words Joseph comforted and 
cheered his brethren, embracing them all with 
tenderness, and conversing w^ith them long and 
kindly. 

Pharoah the king and his servants were 
pleased that Joseph had found his brethren, 
and that they were coming with their father to 
dwell near them. 

The king said to them, " I will give you the 
good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the 
fat of the land." 



EMIGRATION TO EGYPT. 

When the sons of Jacob returned home with 
this wonderful news, Joseph is yet alive, and 
is governor over all the land of Egypt, the old 
man his father could not believe it. 



118 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



"His heart fainted, for he believed them 
not." But when he saw the presents sent by 
Joseph, and the wagons in wilich 
they were to journey, and heard the . 
whole story related in order, his 
heart revived. 




" And Israel said, It is enough : Joseph my 
son is yet alive : I will go and see him before 
I die." 

So Jacob set forth on his journey towards 
Egypt. At Beersheba, on the border of the 
land of Canaan, he paused and offered a solemn 
sacrifice to Jehovah. And here, in the visions 
of the night, he heard the voice of God speak- 
ing to him, and saying, 



PEXTATEUCH. 119 



" Fear not to go down into Egypt ; for I will 
there make of thee a great nation, and I will 
also surely bring thee up again." 

Then Jacob came with his sons, and their 
families, their cattle, and their goods, to Egypt. 
Joseph went out in his chariot, and met his 
father in the land of Goshen ; and he fell on his 
neck, and wept. 

" And Israel said unto Joseph, Xow let me 
die, since I have seen thy face, and thou art 
yet alive. 77 

After this, Joseph presented his father to Pha- 
roah. The king reverently bowed himself before 
the aged patriarch and received his blessing. 

Jacob was one hundred and thirty years of 
age at this time, and he lived seventeen years 
in Egypt. The whole number of his descend- 
ants that emigrated with him, was sixty-six; 
and adding to these the patriarch himself, with 
Joseph and his two sons, already in Egypt, they 
formed a tribe, or colony, of seventy persons. 

Joseph settled them in the land of Goshen, 
that part of Egypt which lay nearest to Canaan, 
and which afforded the best pasturage for their 
flocks ; and here they and their posterity dwelt 
for three hundred and fifteen years. 



120 BIBLE STUDIES. 



SHEPHERD. 

Joseph did not bring his father's family into 
Egypt proper, although the king had gener- 
ously offered them the best of the land; but 
settled them in the adjoining province of 
Goshen. The hostility of the Egyptians tow- 
ards shepherds is the reason assigned for 
this arrangement: "For every shepherd is an 
abomination to the Egyptians." Gen. 46 : 34. 



From what had this enmity arisen ? 

Probably from the barbarous character of 
those shepherds with whom the Egyptians had 
been acquainted. 

The borders of Egypt were infested with pas- 
toral tribes of fierce and plundering habits who 
made frequent inroads upon their territory. 
The country had suffered also from an invasion 
of Phenician warriors called the shepherd 
kings, who entered the kingdom with a large 
army, laid waste the cities, and destroyed mul- 
titudes of the inhabitants. 

The Hebrew shepherds were a very different 



PENTATEUCH. 121 



people, and the holy Scriptures accord a high 
honor and dignity to pastoral life. 

The most eminent patriarchs were shepherds, 
and their wives and daughters often acted as 
shepherdesses. The seven daughters of the 
priest of Midian tended their father's flock; 
and Rachel kept the'sheep of Laban. 

God is often called the Shep'herd of Israel, 
and kings the shepherds of the people. Christ 
is styled the Good Shepherd, the Chief Shep- 
herd, and the Great Shepherd of the sheep. 

The word pastor signifies shepherd ; and the 
ministers of the gospel are the pastors or shep- 
herds who feed the flock of Christ. 



DEATH OF JACOB. 

When the time drew near that Jacob must 
die, he obtained a solemn promise from Joseph 
that he would not bury him in Egypt, but 
would carry his remains to Canaan, and bury 
him with his fathers. 

At another time Joseph visited his infirm 
father, taking with him his two sons, Manasseh 
and Bphraim ; and the old man, sitting upon 
his bed, blessed the lads, and adopted them as 

Bib Stud. 1 i 



122 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




lifa&i his own children, making; 
them the heads of tribes 
like his other sons, and thus 
giving to Joseph a double 
portion of honor 
among his 
brethren. 
Finally, Is- 
rael,before 
his death, 
assembled 
all his sons to hear his last solemn injunctions, 
and receive his farewell blessing. Addressing 
each in turn, he uttered a series of brief, but 
strikingly descriptive prophecies concerning 
the future fortunes of their posterity ; and then, 
composing himself upon the bed, the aged pa- 
triarch drew his last breath. 

Among these dying prophecies of Jacob, the 
most remarkable is that which relates to Judah : 
" The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, 
nor a lawgiver from between his feet until 
Shiloh come ; and unto him shall the gathering 
of the people be." 

This prophecy indicates that Judah should 
maintain a preeminence over the other tribes 



PENTATEUCH. 123 



until the coming of Christ ; that from this tribe 
Shiloh, or the great Messiah, should come, who 
would finally gather into one fold all that 
should become his people. 

Wonderful prophecy! — wonderful for the 
greatness of its theme, for its literal fulfilment, 
and for the vast extent of futurity which it per- 
vades with its clear light. 

The body of Jacob being embalmed, Joseph 
and his brethren, with chariots and horsemen, 
and a great company of Egyptians, carried him 
in funeral pomp into the land of Canaan, and 
laid him in the cave of Machpelah, with his 
fathers Abraham and Isaac. 



EMBALMING. 
This is a process used to preserve the bodies 
of the dead from decay and decomposition, by 
means of drugs, spices, ointments, and wrap- 
pings of linen cloth. It had its origin in 
Egypt, and was undoubtedly useful in prevent- 
ing contagion, and keeping the air pure from 
corrupting influences. 



DEATH OF JOSEPH. 
Joseph was seventeen years of age when car- 



124 BIBLE STUDIES. 

ried from Canaan into Egypt; he remained 
thirteen years in bondage and imprisonment, 
and then enjoyed eighty years of honor, pros- 
perity, and happiness. 

During this last period., he was ruler over 
the land of Egypt, and constantly exposed to 
the temptations of idolatry. The various pleas- 
ures of life, and all the gratifications which 
flow from wealth, power, and popularity, were 
within his grasp, yet he remained uncorrupted. 
He preserved through life the simplicity and 
integrity of his character, and the religious 
faith of his fathers. With his last breath, he 
reminded his brethren of the promises of God, 
made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that he 
would surely visit them, and restore them to 
the land of Canaan ; and he took an oath of 
them that they should carry his bones with 
them. 

"So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten 
years old ; and they embalmed him, and he was 
put in a coffin in Egypt." 

This is the last verse of the book of Genesis. 



When the Israelites left Egypt to return to 
Canaan, they took the remains of Joseph with 



PENTATEUCH. 125 



them, and carefully guarded the sacred treasure 
through all their wanderings. After they ob- 
tained possession of the promised land, the 
bones of the patriarch found a resting-place at 
Shechem, "in a parcel of ground which Jacob 
bought of the sons of Hamor." Josh. 24 : 32. 
Between his death and his burial, about two 
hundred years had intervened. 



11* 



126 ■ BIBLE STUDIES. 



EXODUS 



THE DEPARTURE. 

In Exodus two lofty themes are given : 

The great Departure, and the Law from heaven. 



What other exode opens scenes so vast, 
As Israel's thousands out of Egypt cast? 
What contrast more intense can history bring, 
Than IsraePs chief, and Egypt's cruel king ? 



What was the condition of the Israelites in Egypt? 

They became very numerous and powerful. 
How long did their prosperity last? 

About one hundred and thirty years, reckon- 
ing from Jacob's emigration to Egypt. 
What then commenced? 

The days of bondage. 

Who was king of Egypt at that time ? 

He is called Pharaoh, but he was very unlike 
that Pharaoh who was Joseph's friend. 

He was cruel and obstinate; and he was 



PENTATEUCH. 127 



filled with fear lest the Israelites should become 
so numerous as to overpower his own people, 
and take possession of the kingdom. He there- 
fore made use of them as bondmen, and obliged 
them to labor in stone and mortar and brick, 
and to build walls and cities, storehouses and 
pyramids. 

What effect did this have on their numbers ? 

"The more they afflicted them, the more they 
multiplied and grew.' 7 

Then the cruel king had recourse to slaugh- 
ter. He issued a fearful decree against the 
Israelites, by which he hoped to seal their 
doom, and cut them off from being a people 
after that generation. 

"Every son that is born ye shall cast into the 
river, and every daughter ye shall save alive." 



BIRTH OF MOSES. 

A child is born — a ghild exceeding fair ; 
In silence shut the tidings from the air. 
Hide him, mother, from Egyptian eyes, 
This goodly child — conceal the beauteous prize. 
In secret weave the ark ; in darkness go 
And lay him gently by the river's flow ; 



128 



3IBLE STUDIES. 



Then leave the rest to God : he shall not die. 
Israel, your great deliverance draweth nigh 
This child is born to set the nation free ; 
A prophet, priest, and king, in him we see. 
Bright symbol of our Lord, no tyrant's wrath, 
No rushing Nile can sweep him from life's path ; 
For he shall live to shake the Egyptian throne, 
And on the mountain talk with God alone. 




MOSES DRAWN FROM THE RIVER. 
It was faith in the promise and protecting 
power of God, that led the mother of Moses to 



PENTATEUCH. 129 



use her best endeavors to preserve the life of 
her child. Heb. 11:23. 

Trust in Providence, instead of preventing 
the use of means, leads us to make every possi- 
ble exertion to insure success. See how the 
providential kindness of God rewarded this 
loving mother for her earnest efforts and im- 
plicit faith. 

The daughter of Pharaoh walking with her 
maidens on the bank of the Nile, saw among 
the flags an ark or cradle, constructed from the 
sedge, or paper reeds that grew near the river. 
Curious to know what it contained, she sent 
her maid to bring it up from the water. On 
opening it, she found therein a weeping babe. 
The princess adopted this child for her own, 
and called his name Moses. 

Moses signifies drawn out. 

Ancient writers say that the name of Pha- 
raoh's daughter was Thermutis+ 

What we learn of her from the Bible, shows 
that she was gentle and compassionate. Fancy 
likewise bestows on her every other amiable 
quality of the heart, and adds to the picture 
all the graces of person and mind. A noble 
princess saving a Hebrew infant from perish- 



130 BIBLE STUDIES. 

ing in the water — how tender, how full of in- 
terest is the recital! We love the princess, 
and we rejoice at the safety of the child. 

But will not this child now be brought up in all the 
idolatry of the Egyptians ? 

The providence of God provides against this 
calamity. The sister of Moses was watching 
by the river, to see what would become of the 
child. She presents herself before the princess, 
and is employed by her to procure a Hebrew 
woman to nurse the child for her. Joyfully 
she hastens home, and brings the child's 
mother. 

Thus the infancy of Moses, and perhaps the 
greater portion of his early childhood, was 
spent among his own people, where he would 
learn to reverence the true God. 

He was afterwards educated at the Egyptian 
court, and became learned in all the wisdom of 
that ancient and renowned people. "He was 
mighty in words and deeds. 77 



THE EXILE OF MOSES. 
Moses at length offended the Egyptians, and 
was obliged to leave the country. 



PENTATEUCH. 131 



How was this ? 

See Acts 7 : 23, 29 ; Heb. 11 : 24-27. 

How old was he at this time? 
How long did he remain in Midian ? 

All this time the heavy bondage of the Is- 
raelites in Egypt continued. Moses was in 
exile ; but God was preparing him for the great 
office of delivering his people. He married the 
daughter of the priest of Midian, and tended 
the flocks of his father-in-law. The name of 
his wife was Zipporah, and of his son Gershom. 
Grershom signifies a stranger. 

The land of Midian, where Moses dwelt, was 
near the Red sea. It was a wild and lonely 
region, full of rugged mountains, and deep se- 
cluded valleys. There was another Midian 
which lay east of the Dead sea, inhabited by a 
populous nation deeply sunk in idolatry. 



MOSES IN THE DESERT. 

And now behold Moses wandering far into 
the desert to find patches of green pasture for 
the flocks. He comes to mount Horeb. 

Horeb was either the same mountain that is 
called Sinai, or a different summit belonging to 



132 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



the same ridge. " And the Angel 
of the Lord [Hebrew, the Angel of 
Jehovah] appeared unto him in a 
flame of fire out of the midst of a 
bush; and he 
looked, and be- 
hold, the bush 
i burned with 




fire, and the bush was not consumed. " 

Who was this angel of Jehovah ? 

He speaks to Moses from the midst of the 

shining flame, and declares himself to be the 

true God, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and 

of Jacob. 

He proclaims also another name, a wonderful name, 
by which he may be known — What is it?- 

"I Am that I Am;" this implies independent 
self-existence, underived and eternal. 

The almighty voice commands Moses to re- 
turn to Egypt to collect the elders of Israel, 



PENTATEUCH. 133 



and proclaim to them that the Lord God of 
their fathers had appeared to him, and com- 
manded him to make known to his people, that 
the time for their deliverance from the bondage 
of Egypt had come. To Pharaoh also must he 
and the elders go, and demand the release of 
the Israelites : " The Lord said, I have surely 
seen the affliction of my people, and heard their 
cry ; I know their sorrows ; come now, and I 
will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest 
bring forth my people out of Egypt." 

How was Moses to prove that he was sent of God? 

He was endowed with the power of working 
miracles. Exod. 4 : 4. God encouraged him 
by saying that the rod or staff which he held 
in his hand, should be transformed by his 
almighty power into a serpent, and afterwards 
he would cause it to return to the form of a 
rod. No such miracle could be wrought by 
human power, and those who beheld it must 
acknowledge that the agent acted by divine 
authority. 

What is a miracle ? 

An event which does not occur in the ordi- 
nary course of nature, and is beyond the power 

BibT Stud. 12 



134 BIBLE STUDIES. 

of natural causes to produce : something which 
man cannot do without immediate aid from 
God. 

People may be deceived, and think they be- 
hold a miracle when they are imposed upon by 
artifice. But the miracles of Moses were 
wrought in public, before numerous witnesses, 
and in their nature and character were so open 
and conspicuous that the persons in whose 
presence they were performed could not be 
deceived. 



Who was joined with Moses as herald or chief 
speaker ? 

How old were the brothers when they stood before 
Pharaoh ? 

What series of miracles subdued the proud heart of 
Pharaoh, and made him consent to set the Israelites 
free? 

The ten plagues. 



THE PLAGUES. 

1. Water reddens to blood ; 

2. Frogs leap from Nile's flood ; 

3. Lice, born of earth's dust, 
Fill the soul with disgust ; 



PENTATEUCH. 



135 



4. Air swarms with the fly ; 

5. By murrain, beasts die ; 

6. Man is tortured with blains ; 
T. Hail out of heaven rains ; 

8. Fierce locusts earth cover ; 

9. Three dark days pass over ; 
10. The first-born are slain ; 

? T is the last of the train. 
There 's a loud cry of woe — 
Haste ! haste ! — "Let Israel go !" 



Go ! go ! is now the king's decree ; 
This conquering plague sets Israel free. 



What ordinance was instituted to commemorate the 
departure from Egypt ? 

The Passover ; so called because the destroy- 
ing angel passed over the houses of the Israel- 
ites when he slew the first-born of Egypt. 

What were the ceremonies of the Passover ? 

A lamb was sacrificed, and the blood 
sprinkled upon the posts and lintel of every 
door, as a sign to the angel of death to pass by 
that house, and not enter on his fatal errand. 
The lamb was eaten by the household. 



L36 BIBLE STUDIES. 

What counterpart to this ordinance do we find un- 
der the gospel dispensation? 

The Lord's Supper, which has been commem- 
orated by Christians from the day on which 
Christ rose from the dead to the present time. 



Christ is our Passover; he suffered death 
for us in the same month, and on the same day 
of the month, that Israel went out of Egypt. 

He frees us from the bondage of sin ; and by 
his blood, through faith, we are preserved from 
the wrath of God, and led into a better coun- 
try than was the promised land of the Israel- 
ites. 

The blood marked upon the door is a sym- 
bol of our duty openly to profess our faith in 
Christ. 

" It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, 
who passed over the houses of the children of 
Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians." 
Exod. 12:27. 

" Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us." 
1 Cor. 5:7. 



PENTATEUCH. 13? 



THE DEPARTURE. 

At what period was the departure from Egypt? 

Four hundred and thirty years after the call 
of Abraham. 

Fourteen hundred and ninety-one years be- 
fore Christ. 

What number of persons left the country? 

Probably about three millions. 

The number of men was six hundred thou- 
sand, besides women and children. There went 
with them also a mixed multitude who were 
not true Israelites, but who, from various mo- 
tives, followed in the train. 

The departing Israelites carried with them 
their flocks, herds, and effects. What a mighty 
host to break up their settlements, and march 
at once into an unknown country. 



BORROWING. 

With what were the Israelites, before their depar- 
ture, freely furnished by the Egyptians ? 

c; They borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of 
silver, jewels of gold, and raiment ; and they 
spoiled the Egyptians." Exod. 12 : 35, 36. 

12* 



138 BIBLE STUDIES. 

What is here called borrowing, signifies also 
requesting, or demanding. They required these 
things as wages for their long service to the 
Egyptians, and the Egyptians probably surren- 
dered them without any expectation of their 
being restored. They spoiled the Egyptians; 
that is, they carried away their treasures. So 
great was the present terror of the Egyptians, 
and their haste to have the plague removed, 
that they lent, or gave the Israelites whatever 
they asked. 

Whose remains did Moses take with them ? 
He took the bones of Joseph. Exod. 13 : 19. 
How were they guided on their journey ? 
By a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of 
fire by night. Exod. 13:21. 



THE PURSUIT. 



What did the Egyptians do, when they found that the 
Israelites were actually escaping from servitude ? 

The king and his people said one to another, 
Why have we done this, that we have let Israel 
go from serving us ? 

So the king assembled the military force of 
the land, six hundred chosen chariots, with 



PENTATEUCH. 139 



horses and fighting men in great numbers, and 
pursued after the Israelites. They followed 
the track of their march through the wilder- 
ness, and came near to them as they were en- 
camped by the Eed sea. 

What was now the condition of the Israelites ? 

Eeflect upon it for a moment. They were 
" entangled in the land" — shut in by high moun- 
tains on the right hand and on the left, the sea 
in front of them, and the Egyptian army pour- 
ing down upon their rear. They were in truth 
reduced to great extremity, and grief and ter- 
ror took possession of the multitude. 

What did they propose to Moses ? 

Immediate submission to the Egyptians, and 
of course a return to their former bondage. It 
were better, they said, to serve the Egyptians, 
than to die in the wilderness. 



Moses would not have ventured to lead the 
people into such a strait without the express 
command of God, and the firm conviction that 
he would be sustained by almighty power. 
When, therefore, the people murmured, he stood 
firm, and in reply to their complaints said, 

" Fear ye not ; stand still, and see the salva- 



140 BIBLE STUDIES. 



tion of the Lord. The Lord shall fight for you, 
and ye shall hold your peace." 

And now the command of God is issued : 
" Speak unto the children of Israel, that they 
go forward." 

The people obeyed. Moses lifted up the 
miraculous rod, and stretched forth his hand 
over the sea, and the waters opened a path, 
rising up as walls on either side, while the 
whole vast army of the Israelites went over on 
dry ground. 

We may suppose that Moses and Aaron went 
down first into the dark channel, and that all 
the tribes under their elders followed in due 
order and rank. It was in the night. The 
pillar of fire that hung over them was their 
light. In faith they went through the dark 
waters and reached the opposite shore in safe- 
ty — not one perished. 
Will the Egyptians follow them into the sea ? 
Yes ; in their madness and folly they will 
pursue. Behold them rushing forward with 
horses and chariots, raging to overtake them, 
and to divide the spoil. But no sooner is the 
host of Israel safe on the other side, than God 
gives the command — the waters return to their 



PENTATEUCH. 



141 




accustomed channel, and the whole army of 
Pharaoh is overwhelmed in the depths of the 
sea. Not one of the mighty host escaped. 



THE SONG OF TRIUMPH. 

Then sung Moses and the children of Israel 
a song of deliverance and of praise unto the 
Lord, saying, 

" The Lord is my strength and my song, and 
he is become my salvation. 



142 BIBLE STUDIES. 



"Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he 
cast into the sea ; his chosen captains also hath 
he drowned in the Red sea. 

" The depths have covered them : they sank 
to the bottom as a stone. 

" And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the 
Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the 
horse and his rider hath he thrown into the 
sea. 77 Exod. 15 : 2, 4, 5, 21. 

In this beautiful song all the glory of their 
deliverance is ascribed to God, and the joyful 
conclusion is, " The Lord shall reign for ever 
and ever. 77 

It appears to have been composed for per- 
formance in a great congregation of the people ; 
the men under musical leaders, and Miriam at 
the head of the women, answering each other 
in responsive parts. 

Miriam is the Hebrew name for Maria and 
Mary. 

MIRACLES OF THE WILDERNESS. 

1. Manna fell upon the earth like dew, or 
hoarfrost, for their daily food. 

2. The bitter waters of Marah were made 
sweet and wholesome. 



PENTATEUCH. 143 



3. Flocks of quails came up and covered the 
camp to supply them with flesh to eat. 
The word Marah, signifies bitter. 



MANNA. 

11 Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I 
will rain bread from heaven for you." Exod. 
16:4. 

The manna began to fall about one month 
after they left Egypt. The provisions they 
brought with them were exhausted, and the 
people were murmuring for want of food. It 
fell around the camp in small white grains, 
which covered the ground in the morning, and 
continued to fall every day, except the Sabbath, 
during forty years. When the Israelites had 
passed over Jordan, and entered the promised 
land, the miraculous supply of manna ceased. 

This great miracle was daily wrought before 
the eyes of the people ; a constant manifesta- 
tion of the providential care of God. 

What was the most extraordinary circumstance attend- 
ing this miracle? Was it not this, that no manna fell 
on the Sabbath ? 

Jehovah observes the great day of rest ! He 

prepares in one day the food for two days. 



144 BIBLE STUDIES. 

What an example for man! As little as is 
consistent with supplying the wants of nature 
should be done in regard to food on the Sab- 
bath. So God teaches us by the manna. 

" For that the Lord hath given you the Sab- 
bath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day 
the bread of two days : abide ye every man in 
his place ; let no man go out of his place on 
the seventh day." 

Does not this precept forbid travelling, and 
all unnecessary walking abroad on the Sabbath? 

Why did the manna spoil that was kept over ? 
Was it not to show the folly of hoarding ? 

God fed them day by day. So Christ teaches 
us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread. 

How was the manna prepared for food ? 

The grains, about the size of coriander seed, 
were pounded fine in mortars, kneaded into 
cakes, and baked in pans. 

" And the taste of it was like wafers made 
with honey." It is called " bread of heaven," 
and " angels' food." Psa. 78 : 24, 25. 

Of what was manna typical ? 

Of Christ the bread of life that came down 
from heaven. John 6 : 48-51. 



PENTATEUCH. 145 



There is a substance still found in Arabia 
which is called manna, but it is collected only 
in small quantities. Tho manna that fed the 
Israelites was miraculously created to supply 
their wants in the desert. When tiie Israelites 
first saw it, they did not know what it was, and 
said one to another, What is it? Hence the 
name of manna, which signifies, What is this ? 

"And Moses said, This is the thing which 
the Lord commandeth, Till an omer of it to be 
kept for your generations, that they may see the 
bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilder- 



Would there be any reason for preserving a specimen of 
the manna, if it still continued to fall ? 



WATER FROM THE ROCK, OR FOURTH 
MIRACLE OF THE WILDERNESS. 

When the people again wanted water, did they trust 
God and wait ? 

No ; they murmured against Moses, and were 
ready to stone him to death. They tempted 
God also, and forgetful of the evidences of his 
presence and care, exclaimed, 

" la the Lord among us, or not ?" 

Bib. Stud. 13 



146 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Great was the mercy of Jehovah ! How did he display 
it to these ungrateful Israelites ? 

Moses went forth at his command, and in the 
presence of all the people, standing upon a rock 
in Horeb, he struck it with his rod, and water 
gushed from the flinty surface, which ran down 
through the camp in streams sufficient to re- 
fresh all the people and their flocks. 

Moses called the name of the place where 
they were at this time encamped, Massah and 
Meribah, that is, temptation and strife. 

These names were chosen as memorials of 
their sin, and as warnings to future genera- 
tions. 



THE SPIRITUAL ROCK. 

The gifts of the Spirit are rivers of living 
water, flowing from Christ the rock. 

" He brought streams out of the rock, and 
caused water to run down like rivers." Psa. 
78:16. 

" They drank of that spiritual Rock that fol- 
lowed them ; and that Rock was Christ. 77 1 
Cor. 10:4. 

"Whosoever drinketh of the water that I 
shall give him shall never thirst. 77 John 4 : 14. 



PENTATEUCH. 



141 



THE ROD OF MOSES. 

The rock by Moses struck, 
Poured forth a living stream ; 

So flinty hearts their springs unlock, 
Touched by the Spirit's beam. 

Then Jesus, whispering low, 
Says, I will ease thy pain ; 

And anthems, sung by angels, show 
A soul is born again. 

Lord, if a heart of stone 

Be found among us here, 
A heart the world still calls its own, 

A stranger to thy fear ; 

Haste, Spirit, let thy dart 
Smite like the prophet's rod ; 

Melt into life the frozen heart, 
And bring it home to God. 



THE LAW. 

When was the law given to Moses ? 

Fifty days after the departure from Egypt. 

Near what mountain were they encamped ? 



148 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




SINAI. 

Sinai and Horeb were peaks of a remarkable 
pile of mountains lying in Stony Arabia, be- 
tween the two arms of the Red sea. 

God descended upon Sinai with thunder and 
smoke ; the mountain quaked, and fiery flashes 
issued from the thick darkness. From the 
midst of the cloud, Moses heard the voice of 
Jehovah, proclaiming the Ten Commandments. 
The people also heard the voice of God speak- 
ing from the fire. Deut. 4 : 33. 



PENTATEUCH. 149 



" The Lord came from Sinai : he came with 
ten thousands of saints : from his right hand 
went a fiery law for them." Deut. 33 : 2. 



Moses was on the mountain with the divine glory — 
How long ? 

During that time God gave him directions 
concerning the erection of the tabernacle, the 
institution of the priesthood, and the ceremo 
nial law. At the close of these divine commu- 
nications, God gave into the hands of Moses 
two plates, or tables of stone, called the tables 
of testimony, on which the ten commandments 
were engraved by the finger of God. Exod. 
32:16. 



RELAPSE TO IDOLATRY. 

See Moses descending from the mountain 
with the sacred testimony in his hand. 

While he had been absent what had taken place ? 

Woe! Woe! The people had persuaded 
Aaron to form a molten calf, like one of the 
gods of Egypt, and they were worshipping this 
vile image as the true God, the God of Israel, 
who had delivered them from bondage. 

13* 



150 BIBLE STUDIES. 



The Israelites had dwelt so long in Egypt 
that they had become habituated to the wor- 
ship of idols, and they loved this vain and pom- 
pous service. The worship of the invisible 
Jehovah, without any similitude to represent 
him to their gross minds, was wearisome, and 
they yielded to every temptation to return to 
the idolatrous usages of Egypt. They desired 
to worship Jehovah under the form of Apis, the 
Egyptian god. 

Observe here, that a great and leading object 
of the mission of Moses was, to root out this 
tendency to idolatry, and bring the Israelites 
back to the pure and simple worship of their 
fathers. Jehovah regarded all image worship 
as idolatry. 

What became of those sacred tables which were the 
work of God ? 

When Moses, coming down from the mount, 
saw the molten calf, and heard the noise of 
the worshippers, singing and shouting, and pay- 
ing the honors due only to God, to the abomina- 
tion of Egypt, his indignation and amazement 
were so great, that in his haste he cast the holy 
tablets from him, and broke them in pieces at 
the foot of the mount. 



PENTATEUCH. 



151 



- "T. ~~ 




Why was he in such haste ? 

It is said that his " anger waxed hot/' He 
was overcome with the thought of the great sin 
that had been committed, and intent only upon 
destroying the idol and rebuking its guilty 
worshippers. It was this that made him, for 
the moment, regardless of the precious treasure 
he bore in his hands. 

He ordered the calf to be reduced to powder, 
and those who had been foremost in its worship 
to be slain by the sons of Levi. 



152 BIBLE STUDIES. 



Were the tables of the testimony renewed ? 

Yes ; in a copy made by man, but not in the 
original splendor of divine workmanship. At 
the command of God, Moses prepared two 
tables similar to the first, and carried them to 
the top of the mountain, where the divine hand 
engraved the same record upon them that had 
been written on the former. These tables were 
afterwards deposited in the ark. 

The ten commandments taken together are 
called the Decalogue. 



THE TABERNACLE. 

The Tabernacle was a sacred tent, for the 
solemn worship of God, and for communication 
with him as the king and ruler of Israel. 

It was contrived so as to be taken apart and 
reconstructed at pleasure, that it might be 
easily carried from place to place. Wherever, 
in their journeyings, the host encamped, it was 
set up in the midst of the tents. 

It was the sanctuary, or habitation of God — 
the palace of Jehovah, as the sovereign of the 
nation. Exod. 25 : 8. 



PENTATEUCH. 



153 



How were the materials obtained for the erection of the 
Tabernacle ? 

Exodus 35 : 29. 




The Tabernacle was of an oblong form ; fifty- 
five feet one way, and eighteen the other. The 
walls in the interior were constructed, on three 
sides, of boards or bars of shittim wood, over- 
laid with gold, and connected together by bars 
and rings. On the front, or open side, was a 
row of pillars, overlaid with gold. Over this 
structure four coverings of curtains were laid, 
one upon another. 



154 BIBLE STUDIES. 

1. The inner one, forming the ceiling, was of » 
fine linen, embroidered with figures of cheru- 
bim, in various colors. 

2. Curtains of cloth formed of goat's hair. 

3. Skins of animals dyed red. 

4. An outer covering of skins. 

In front, over the five pillars, was suspended 
a richly embroidered curtain. 

The interior was divided into two apart- 
ments, namely, the Holy Place, and the inner 
sanctuary, or Holy of Holies, The separation 
was made by a row of pillars, overlaid with 
gold, and set in sockets of silver, from which a 
veil of fine linen, wrought with needle-work in 
rich colors, was suspended. 



What was in the Holy Place? 

1. The golden Altar, on which incense was 
burnt. 

2. The golden Table, on which were twelve 
loaves of show-bread, renewed every Sabbath. 

3. The golden Candlestick, with seven lamps, 
or branches. 



What was in the Holy of Holies ? 
1. The Ark, or golden chest. 



PENTATEUCH. 155 



2. The Tables of stone, containing the ten 
commandments. 

3. The Mercy-seat, or lid of the ark. 

4. The golden Cherubim, standing on the 
mercy-seat. 

5. Aaron's Rod, that budded. 



What was in the court of the Tabernacle ? 

1. The Altar of burnt-offerings. 

2. The Laver of brass. 

The court of the Tabernacle was a large open 
space surrounding it, and inclosed with pillars 
and curtains reaching from pillar to pillar. 
Here all the sacrifices were made. 

The brazen layer contained water for wash- 
ing the sacred articles. 



LAWS OF MOSES. 
What division may be made of the laws of Moses ? 
They may be divided into the Moral, Judi- 
cial, and Ceremonial laws. 



What is the moral law ? 

The great principles of this law are con- 
tained in the Decalogue. 

Moral laws are intended for all times, all 
circumstances, all countries- all races of men. 



156" BIBLE STUDIES. 

Some of the great and leading precepts of the 
Mosaic law were, 

1. Love to God : this was the first and great 
commandment of the law. Deut. 6:5. 

2. Love to one's neighbor : this second was 
like unto the first. Lev. 19 : 18. 

3. Kindness to the poor, the widow, the 
fatherless, the stranger, and even to enemies. 
Exod. 23 : 4, 5 ; Deut. 24 : 14, 17, 19. 

4. Mercy towards the brute creation. This 
is urged with great earnestness. Deut. 25 : 4, 
and 22: 6, 7. 

The same sanction is appended to this pre- 
cept as to the fifth commandment : " That it 
may be well with thee, and that thou mayest 
prolong thy days/ 7 



How gentle is our God — how kind his word : 
The Lord Jehovah pleadeth for the bird ! 
Give to the laboring ox, man, his rest ; 
And spare the fluttering songster on its nest. 
Such tenderness for life hath God displayed ; 
Such pity for the beings that he made. 
All-merciful, He, from his throne above, 
Lists to the panting steed, or moaning dove. 
Like him, we would a gentle sway maintain, 
Nor give to aught that breathes a needless pain. 



PENTATEUCH. 157 

What was the object of the judicial laws ? 
To guide and regulate the people in their 
civil transactions, and ordinary affairs of gov- 
ernment. 



What was the object of the ceremonial laws ? 
To direct them in matters pertaining to re- 
ligion. 

The ceremonial, or ritual law was intended 
for a particular people only, and to serve a 
temporary purpose. It was peculiarly adapted 
to the circumstances and characteristic traits 
of the Israelites, and was not designed to be of 
universal obligation. 

Where were all sacrifices to be offered, and by whom ? 

At the tabernacle, and by priests. The 
penalty of death was attached to a violation 
of this law. This punishment was designed to 
prevent idolatrous sacrifices and superstitious 
practices, to which the people, from long con- 
tact with the Egyptians, were naturally in- 
clined, and to secure unity of worship — the 
worship of the one great Jehovah. 

What tribe was chosen to conduct the public worship ? 
Of what orders did the priesthood consist ? 

1. High-priest ; 2. Priests ; 3. Levites. 

Bib. Stud. 14 



158 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



To what family was the priesthood limited ? 
To that of Aaron. Exodus 28 : 1. 
What was the penalty, if another should assume the 
office? 

Death. Num. 3 : 10. 



Why were the Levites devoted to the service of the 
Tabernacle ? 

God appointed them as substitutes for the 

first-born, which had been consecrated to him, 

as a memorial that the Israelites were spared 

when the first-born of Egypt were slain. 



THE HIGH-PRIEST. 




The high-priest was 
distinguished from 
other priests by a rich- 
ly embroidered dress, 
connected with a 
breastplate and mitre. 
On the mitre was a 
golden plate, on which 
was engraved, 

"Holiness to the 
Lord." 

The breastplate was 
set with twelve pre- 



PENTATEUCH. 159 



cious stones of various kinds, in four rows, and 
contained the sacred " Urim and Thummim;' 
or lights and perfections. 

"And thou shalt put in the breastplate of 
judgment the Urim and the Thummim ; and 
they shall be upon Aaron's heart when he go- 
eth in before the Lord." Exod. 28 : 30. 



HOLT GARMENTS. 

"And thou shalt make holy garments for 
Aaron thy brother, for glory, and for beauty." 
Exod. 28 : 2. 

The garments which the high-priest was 
commanded to wear on solemn occasions were, 

1. The ephod. This was a garment of fine 
linen, brocaded, or embroidered with many 
colors, originally made without sleeves, con- 
sisting of two parts, and supported with shoul- 
der pieces in which onyx-stones were set, en- 
graven with the names of the children of Israel, 
six on one shoulder and six on the other. 

2. " The curious girdle of the ephod," made 
of similar materials and connected with it. It 
was wrought with gold, blue, purple, and scarlet. 

3. " The breastplate of judgment," connected 
also with the ephod. It was a rich piece of 



160 BIBLE STUDIES. 

embroidery about ten inches square, enriched 
with precious stones in four rows; and these 
stones were engraven like those upon the 
shoulders with the signets of the tribes. In 
the four corners were golden rings by which it 
was fastened with wreathen chains and ribands 
to the girdle and ephod. 

This magnificent breastplate was the seat of 
the Urim and Thummim, or Light and Truth, 
by which the will and judgment of God were 
made known. What these were, and in what 
manner they conveyed the divine will to the 
priest, is not known. Nor need we inquire 
too curiously respecting them, since they were 
but types or emblems of the clearer light and 
truth that have since been given to man, and 
we no longer need their aid to discern the will 
of God. The teachings of the Holy Spirit, and 
the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, now make 
known to us the will and mind of the Father 
and are sufficient to lead us into all truth. 

4. " A broidered coat," worn under the 
ephod, reaching to the feet. 

5. "The robe of the ephod." This was a 
mantle of blue cloth, with a strong woven bind- 
ing at the neck, and the hem adorned with 



PENTATEUCH. 161 

golden bells and pomegranates, embroidered in 
various colors. 

6. The mitre: a high-raised ornamented tur- 
ban, with a golden plate in front, on which was 
engraven, Holiness to the Lord. 

These were the peculiar garments of the 
high-priest. The robes of the common priests 
were similar in form, but made of plain linen, 
without ornament. 



What appears to have been the divine purpose in 
directing that the high-priest should be arrayed in 
such magnificent garments ? 

Undoubtedly the most important purpose 
was to represent the glorious robes and re- 
splendent person of Christ, who is the great 
High-priest of his people, entering into the 
holy of holies, to make atonement for sin. 

The high-priest was a type of Christ, and it 
was proper that he should represent holiness 
in its highest beauty, glory, and adornment. 



What were the principal services of the priests ? 
To offer sacrifices, and to burn incense. 
What were the services of the Levites ? 
To attend upon the priests, and perform all 
the necessary work of the tabernacle service. 

14* 




THE ARK. 

The Ark was a sacred chest or cabinet, a 
little more than four feet in length, and about 
two feet and a half in breadth and depth. It 
was made of shittim-wood, overlaid with gold. 
This word Ark is different in the original from 
that which is used for Noah's ark. 

The tables of testimony were kept in the ark. 



Shittim-wood is supposed to be a species of 
Acacia, the wood of which is smooth, hard, and 
almost incorruptible. 



PENTATEUCH. 



163 




The Altar of 
Sacrifice, or of 
burnt-offerings, 
was made of 
shittim • wood, 
overlaid with 
brass, and is 
often called the 
brazen altar. 
It was about 
two yards and a half square, and one yard and 
a half in height. At each corner was a projec- 
tion ; these are called the horns of the altar. 
On the top was a sunk grate, or network, for 
the fire, and a pan below to receive the ashes. 

The pans, shovels, basins, flesh-hooks, were 
all of brass. 

The brazen Laver was a large water-urn or 
basin, standing in another larger basin, called 
the foot of the laver. 

The altar of Incense, overlaid with gold, was 
a little more than half a yard square. 

The golden Candlestick, or lamp-bearer, was 
curiously wrought out of pure gold. 

The golden Censer was a small bowl with a 
long handle for burning and wafting incense. 



164 BIBLE STUDIES. 

HOLY ANOINTING OIL. 

Aaron and his sons were sanctified for the 
priesthood by the holy anointing oil. The 
Tabernacle, the Altar, and all the vessels for 
the use of the tabernacle, were also consecrated 
in the same manner. 

It was composed of five ingredients : Myrrh, 
Sweet Calamus, Cinnamon, Cassia, Oil Olive. 

It was death to compound any like it, or to 
use it for any but sacred purposes. 

This holy oil is an emblem of that unction of 
the Holy Spirit with which Christians in gos- 
pel days have been consecrated to the service 
of God. 



INCENSE. 

The sweet incense burnt upon the golden 
ultar, was compounded of the most precious 
articles of perfumery known in that age, namely, 
Stacte, Onycha, Galbanum, Frankincense. 

The bruising and burning of the incense is 
calculated to remind us of the death and inter- 
cession of Christ. His prayers for his people 
rise like continual incense to the throne of 
God. 



PENTATEUCH. 165 



He " hath given himself for us, an offering 
and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet-smelling 
savor." Eph. 5 : 2. 

When and where was the Tabernacle first reared ? 

In the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month 
of the second year of the exodus. This was 
just a year after the departure from Egypt. 

All its parts and appurtenances were anoint- 
ed with holy oil, and consecrated by numerous 
burnt-offerings. 

In the Holy of Holies was placed the Ark of 
the Testimony. 

In the Ark was deposited the Book of stone: 
that is, the tablets on which were written the 
Ten Commandments, or Testimony of God. 

The commandments are God's testimony or 
witness, declaring his will, and directing man 
in the path of duty. 

The gospel of Christ is also a testimony or 
witness to all nations. Matt. 24 : 14. 

God communed with the high-priest before 
the mercy-seat. The Ark was the symbol of 
the divine presence ; without it, the Tabernacle 
was no longer the temple of Jehovah. 



166 BIBLE STUDIES. 



LEVITICUS; 

OR, 

THE BOOK OF THE LEVITES. 



This book treats of the ceremonies of Jew- 
ish worship, as conducted by the sons of Levi. 

Leviticus, along its legal stream, 
Is strewn with symbols of the gospel scheme : 
Eich gems beneath the ritual darkness shine 
With inner light, and meanings all divine. 



SACRIFICE. 

What was the most important part of the Jewish 
worship ? 

Burnt-offerings, or the offering of animals in 
sacrifice to God, as an atonement for sin. 

What animals were used for sacrifice ? 

Males without blemish, chosen out of the 
herds of domestic cattle, and from the flocks 
of sheep and goats. When the offerer was 
poor, and had no flocks, nor herds, turtledoves 



PENTATEUCH. 



167 




and young pigeons might be offered as substi- 
tutes. 

What was the most important part of the ceremony? 

The sprinkling of the blood by which the 
atonement was made. The blood represented 
life, bestowed as a redemption for life. 

What offerings were made besides animals? 
Choice articles from the vegetable kingdom 



168 BIBLE STUDIES. 

were brought and laid upon the altar ; such as 
ears of corn, meal, bread, cakes, frankincense, 
salt, oil, and wine. They were called meat- 
offerings and drink-offerings. Meat, in this 
connection, has the meaning of food. These 
were offerings of submission, gratitude, and 
praise. 

A small portion of these were burnt, and the 
remainder appropriated to the use of the 
priests. 

Was there any thing in these various offerings that 
could actually cleanse the soul from sin? 

Not in themselves; they derived all their 
efficacy from faith in the promised Saviour. 
They fulfilled the law and released the trans- 
gressor from temporal punishment; and if 
offered in the right spirit, through the merits 
of Christ, secured him from condemnation at 
the day of judgment. 

What accompanied the sacrifices, as a part of public 
worship ? 

Instrumental music, and the singing of sacred 
songs. 

To what did all the sacrifices of the Mosaic law refer ? 

To the atoning sacrifice of Christ. Faith in 



PENTATEUCH. 169 



the promised Saviour was the only ground of 
acceptance with God. The daily sacrifice at 
morning and evening, was a continual memorial 
of God's wrath against sin, and man's need of 
an atonement. 

To what was the Mosaic ritual subservient? 

To the gospel of Christ. It was the morn- 
ing £tar vanishing before the light of the Sun 
of righteousness. 

From all these offerings and laws we should 
learn to hate sin, and to watch against it. 
Above all, to be grateful to Christ, who made 
himself an offering for sin. 1 John 2:1. 

How was the sacred fire upon the altar kindled ? 

See Leviticus 9 : 24. 

This fire is supposed never to have been ex- 
tinguished, till the destruction of the temple of 
Solomon by the Chaldeans. 



CLEAN AND UNCLEAN ANIMALS. 
To what had this distinction reference ? 
Before the flood, to sacrifice, and after the 
flood, to food also. 

Bib Stud. ig 



nO BIBLE STUDIES. 

Noah was commanded to take into the ark 
with him, " of clean beasts by sevens, and of 
beasts not clean by two." 

The unclean were doubtless wild animals, 
not serviceable to man. Those offered in sac- 
rifice were the useful domestic animals, and of 
these the choicest of their kind were devoted 
to the altar. It was a principle of the divine 
law, that whatever was offered to God should 
be the best that the supplicant possessed. 
David said, " Neither will I offer burnt-offer- 
ings unto the Lord my God of that which doth 
cost me nothing." 2 Sam. 24 : 24. 



What reasons can be assigned for this distinction of 
animals in regard to food ? 

1. It was a trial of obedience and faith. 

2. It was necessary for the preservation of 
health, most of the forbidden meats being un- 
wholesome in that climate. 

3. It was a restraint upon the intercourse of 
the people with other nations, and thus pre- 
served them from idolatry and superstition. 
Having a system of food peculiar to themselves, 
would be an effectual means of keeping them a 
distinct people. 



PENTATEUCH. 1T1 



The fowls and beasts prohibited were prin- 
cipally, though not wholly, those that live on 
flesh and carrion; but the distinction was not 
made on account of any inherent difference in 
the nature of animals. It was a special ap- 
pointment by God for particular purposes. 

Holiness of heart and life, and separation 
from idolaters, constituted the grounds of the 
precept- 



What may we learn from this distinction? 

That God would have all men to be pure and 
holy, and to observe the divine law, even in 
the ordinary partaking of food. 

The gospel recognizes no distinction between 
clean and unclean animals in regard to food. 
The apostle Paul says, " I know and am persuad- 
ed by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing un- 
clean of itself." Eom. 14 : 14. 

For us there is a divine law extending to the 
common as well as the sacred actions of life. 
In our daily enjoyments at our tables and 
among our friends, we should partake of the 
bounties of Providence with thanksgiving and 
humility, acknowledging and honoring God as 



172 BIBLE STUDIES. 



our Creator and Redeemer, the source of all 
comfort and the generous giver of food. 

11 Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye 
do, do all to the glory of God.' 7 1 Cor. 10 : 31. 



LEPROSY. 

The laws respecting leprosy and defilement 
had both a civil and religious reference. They 
were designed to prevent contagion, and to 
keep the people from all personal impurity. 
If such laws were in force at the present day, 
it is probable that the plague, which often 
rages with such fatal violence in eastern coun- 
tries, would be unknown. 

Leprosy was a loathsome disease, incurable, 
except by special divine interposition, and is an 
impressive emblem of moral pollution. 

Sin is the leprosy of the soul. 



PARTICULAR LAWS. 
Each precept of the Mosaic law appears to 
have been adapted with precision to a certain 
end; and though we cannot always discover 
the aim, we may be sure that each was benev- 
olent and wise. 



PENTATEUCH. 173 



Some were designed to form a habit of obe- 
dience ; some to eradicate evil habits acquired 
in Egypt ; some to allure into the right way, 
through the senses; some to remind them of 
what God had done for them; and some to 
restrict their intercourse with idolaters. 



BLOOD. 

We might ask, why blood was forbidden to 
be used as food : the answer is found in Leviti- 
cus IT : 11. 

Blood represented the atonement made for 
sin, and was thus an emblem of Christ's sacri- 
fice. 

Another reason may be added. The heathen, 
at their sacrifices, drank the blood of the ani- 
mal, with many abhorrent ceremonies. 



MIXTURES. 
It is not obvious to reason, that any injuri- 
ous influence could be exerted by the use or 
practice of certain mixtures : such as wearing 
garments of mingled linen and woollen ; plough- 
ing with different animals yoked together; 

15* 



1*74 BIBLE STUDIES. 

sowing the vineyard with mixed seeds. Deut. 
22 : 11 ; Lev. 19 : 19. 

Why then were they forbidden? 

As a safeguard against idolatry. The hea- 
then had many superstitious observances in 
regard to such mixtures, and the Israelites 
were prohibited from following their example, 
lest it should prove a snare. The people had 
been educated in the midst of idolatry, and 
they were so prone to fall back into such prac- 
tices, that it was necessary to render them 
odious and unlawful by the most solemn restric- 
tions. 



CUTTING THE HAIR. 

" Ye shall not round the corners of your 
heads; neither shalt thou mar the corners of 
thy beard. 77 Lev. 19 : 27. 

Why prohibit the cutting of the hair and beard in a 
particular fashion? 

This would serve as a marked feature of dis- 
tinction from surrounding nations, who were 
accustomed to arrange the hair and beard up- 
on certain models. 



PENTATEUCH. 175 

THE MORAL LAW, 

AS CONTAINED IN LEVITICUS XIX. 

1. Ye shall be holy; for I the Lord your 
God am holy. 

2. Ye shall fear every man his mother and 
his father. 

3. Turn not unto idols, nor make to your- 
selves molten gods. 

4. When ye reap the harvest of your land, 
thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy 
field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings 
of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them for the 
poor and stranger. 

5. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor 
lie one to another. 

6. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely, 
neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God. 

7. Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbor, nei- 
ther rob him. 

8. Thou shalt not eurse the deaf, nor put a 
stumbling-block before the blind. 

9. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judg- 
ment: in righteousness shalt thou judge thy 
neighbor. 



H6 BIBLE STUDIES. 

10. Thou shalt not go up and down as a 
talebearer among thy people. 

11. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy 
heart. 

12. Thou shalt in anywise rebuke thy neigh- 
bor, and not suffer sin upon him. 

13. Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any 
grudge against the children of thy people. 

14. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. 

15. Neither shall ye use enchantment, nor 
observe times. 

16. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and rever- 
ence my sanctuary. 

17. Regard not them that have familiar 
spirits, neither seek after wizards. 

18. Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, 
and honor the face of the old man, and fear 
thy God. 

19. And if a stranger sojourn with thee in 
your land, ye shall not vex him : thou shalt 
love him as thyself. 

20. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judg- 
ment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in measure. 

21. Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, 
and a just hin, ye shall have. 

What a holy and merciful law! How sub- 



PENTATEUCH. 



m 



lime, how just, how benevolent its enactments! 
Who but God could have been its author! 

An ephah was a dry measure containing a 
little less than a bushel. 

A hin was a measure of liquids, rather more 
than a gallon. 




THE SCAPE GOAT. 
Once a year, on the great day of atonement, 
two goats were brought before the door of the 



178 BIBLE STUDIES. 

tabernacle. On the head of one of them, the 
high-priest laid his hands, and confessed all the 
iniquities of the people. He was then sent 
into the wilderness, far away from the habita- 
tions of men, and set free. The other goat 
was slain as an expiatory sacrifice, and con- 
sumed upon the altar of burnt-offering. 

These rites were designed to show that the 
sins of God's faithful servants were borne away 
from remembrance, and their punishment remit- 
ted, through the efficacy of the great Sacrifice, 
of which the burnt-offering was a type. 



RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS. 

All Israelites were commanded to appear 
three times in the year before the Lord. This 
was at the three great annual festivals, or sea- 
sons of public worship, namely, the Passover, 
Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles. 

Besides these established feasts, congrega- 
tions assembled for public worship every Sab- 
bath, at every new moon, and at the beginning 
of every year. The latter was called the feast 
of Trumpets. 



PENTATEUCH. 1^9 



THE PASSOVER. 

This included the feast of Unleavened Bread, 
and was kept on the fourteenth and fifteenth 
days of the first month of the year. It com- 
memorated the deliverance of the Israelites 
when the first-born of Egypt were slain, and 
was a type of the sacrifice of Christ, " our pass- 
over." 

This festival was observed as long as the 
Jews continued to be a nation, and is still kept 
by those who in their dispersion cling to the 
Mosaic laws. 

The first month of the religious year, by 
which the Jews regulated their feasts, was 
called Nisan, or Abib. It began with the time 
of their departure from Egypt. 

The first month of the civil year was Tishri. 
By this they reckoned the reigns of their kings, 
and all historical and ordinary events. 



PENTECOST. 
This was observed fifty days after the Pass- 
over. It was identical with some other festi- 
vals, namely, feast of Weeks, feast of Wheat- 
harvest, and feast of First-fruits. 



180 BIBLE STUDIES. 

FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 

On what day was the feast of Tabernacles kept? 
How long did it contiuue ? 

See Leviticus 23 : 4. 

At this time the people went out of their 
houses, and dwelt for seven days in booths 
made of the boughs of trees ; this was a memo- 
rial of the booths, or temporary habitations in 
which they dwelt during their wanderings in 
the wilderness. 

After the Israelites had settled abodes in the 
land of Canaan, these booths were sometimes 
erected on the flat roofs of their houses. 



GREAT DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

This was on the tenth day of the month 
Tisrhi. This was the first month of the civil 
year, and the seventh month of the festival 
year. The feast of Trumpets, the great day of 
Atonement, and the feast of Tabernacles, were 
all in the same month, on the first, the tenth, 
and the fifteenth days. 

No part of the Jewish ceremonies more 
clearly represented the great doctrines of the 



PENTATEUCH. 181 

gospel, than the services on the day of Atone- 
ment. It was kept as a solemn fast. The 
people assembled to confess their sins, and to 
seek pardon and deliverance through a sacri- 
ficial atonement ; the scape-goat was sent away 
into the wilderness; a sin-offering was sacri- 
ficed, and the high-priest entering the Holy of 
Holies, sprinkled the blood upon the Mercy- 
seat. 

In these rites are shadowed forth faith, re- 
pentance, remission of sin through the shedding 
of blood, and access to God with entrance to 
heaven through a mediator and intercessor. 
Heb. 9:11, 12. 



THE SABBATICAL YEAR. 

"Six years thou shalt sow thy field." "But 
in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest 
unto the land." Ley. 25 : 3, 4. 

In regard to the sabbatical year, four points 
are to be noted : 

1. Agriculture was intermitted, and the 
ground left without cultivation. 

2. By the miraculous intervention of Jeho- 

Bib. Stud. 16 



182 BIBLE STUDIES. 

vah, the harvest of the sixth year in the series 
produced a sufficient supply for three years. 

3. All Hebrews held in bondage were to be 
released in the sabbatical year, unless it was 
their choice to remain in servitude. 

4. All debts which one Israelite owed to 
another were cancelled. 



YEAR OF JUBILEE. 

This was held after every series of seven 
sabbatical years. Most probably it occurred 
on the forty-ninth year, or the last sabbatical 
year of the series. 

" In the year of Jubilee, ye shall return every 
man unto his possession." 

" The land shall not be sold for ever." 

When the Israelites should enter Canaan, 
and divide it among their tribes and house- 
holds, this was to be the law of propertj^. The 
division must be made by lot ; and once made, 
no inheritance could be sold or alienated for a 
longer term than to the next year of Jubilee. 



PENTATEUCH. 183 



NUMBERS 



A numbering book : all Israel twice enrolled, 
Their standards, and encampments, here behold. 



This book contains two enumerations of the 
Israelites. The first was made early in the 
second year after the departure; the second 
about thirty-eight years later, in the plains of 
Moab, before entering the promised land. 

The enumeration consisted of all males above 
twenty years of age, except the Levites, who 
were not included. 

The second census includes only two men 
who were in the first enrolment. All that vast 
host except these two, had perished during 
their long wanderings in the desert. 

First census, - - 603,550 

Second census, 601,730 



How long were the Israelites encamped at Sinai? 

About a year. They left Sinai on the twen- 
tieth day of the second month of the second 
year, and proceeded directly to Kadesh, on the 
southern border of Canaan. 



184 BIBLE STUDIES. 

The Tabernacle is now completed, and its 
daily services established. The laws have been 
proclaimed; the form of civil government is 
fixed, and all things seem prepared for enter- 
ing Canaan without delay. 

What preparatory measure was taken? 

Twelve messengers or spies, one from each 

tribe, were sent forth to view the land. They 

passed through various parts of it in disguise, 

and returned after forty days 7 absence, bringing 

specimens of the fruits of the land. A single 

cluster of grapes, which they gathered by the 

brook Eschol, was so large that " they bare it 

between two upon a staff." These clusters of 

Eschol were an emblem and a foretaste of the 

blessings of the Promised Land. 

Did the returned messengers agree in their report 
of the land and its people? 

The messengers, with one voice, said that it 
was a beautiful country, abounding in whole- 
some fruits, and flowing with milk and honey ; 
that the people were strong, the cities large 
and well fortified, and some of the men of 
gigantic stature. But ten of them said, We 
cannot conquer the people ; they are stronger 
than we ; let us not go up against them ; all the 



PENTATEUCH. 185 



people are giants ; the sons of Anak are there, 
and we were as grasshoppers in their sight. 

"And all the congregation lifted up their 
voice, and cried; and the people wept that 
night." Num. 14:1. 

But Caleb and Joshua, the messengers of the 
tribes of Judah and Ephraim, stood boldly 
forth and said, " Nay, not so : we are well able 
to overcome the people, for their defence is 
departed from them, and Jehovah is with us ; 
let us go up at once and take possession of the 
land." 

The people would not hear. They murmured 
against Moses and against God, and in their 
madness they said, 

"Let us make us a captain, and let us return 
into Egypt." 

Again the two faithful messengers endeav- 
ored to calm the tumult; 

"But all the congregation bade stone them 
with stones." Num. 14 : 10. 



Would Jehovah let these proud rebels go unpunished ? 
Certainly not. The glory of the Lord ap- 
peared in the tabernacle before all the people, 
and the voice of God proclaimed to Moses, that 

16* 



186 BIBLE STUDIES. 

they should wander forty years in the wilder- 
ness, and that all over twenty years of age 
should perish during that period, and only 
their children should enter the promised land. 
Caleb and Joshua were excepted from this 
decree. Eleazar the priest, and perhaps other 
priests and Levites not included among the 
murmurers, also lived to pass over Jordan into 
Canaan. See Josh. 14 : 1. 



ANOTHER REBELLION. 

A great conspiracy was now organized to 
wrest the government from Moses, and the 
priesthood from Aaron. 

Three of the most noted captains and princes 
were the leaders of the revolt : Korah, Dathan, 
and Abiram. And in league with them, were 
"two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, 
men of renown." Num. 16 : 2. 

The charge which they brought against Mo- 
ses and Aaron was in these words : 

"Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the 
congregation are holy, every one of them, and 
the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift 
ye up yourselves above the congregation of the 
Lord?" 



PENTATEUCH. 181 



Here then is a claim that every man might 
take upon himself the office of a priest. 

How was this controversy decided ? 

While the two hundred and fifty princes of 
the conspiracy stood around the door of the 
tabernacle, with their censers in their hands, 
burning incense, Korah their leader being also 
with them, "fire from the Lord " came out from 
the tabernacle and consumed them. 

Dathan and Abiram had remained in their 
tents: it was the government, and not the 
priesthood, to which they aspired. At the 
same time that the princes were consumed, the 
earth opened and swallowed up them and their 
tents, and all that were in them, or appertained 
to them. 



Was this judgment sufficient to quell the mutiny ? 

By no means. The next day, a cry sounded 
from all parts of the camp against Moses and 
Aaron, " Ye have killed the people of the Lord !" 

How did God manifest his vengeance against this 
fresh rebellion? 

A cloud covered the tabernacle, the glory of 
God appeared, and a plague — a scourge of in- 
stant death — was sent among the people, which 
consumed fourteen thousand seven hundred 



188 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



before it was stayed. An atonement was made 
by Aaron, in God's appointed way. He went 
forth with his censer in his hand, and with fire 
taken from the brazen altar, stood between the 
living and the dead, wafting to heaven that 
incense which represents the intercession of 
Christ, and the scourge ceased its ravages. 



AARON'S ROD. 

How was the dispute about the priesthood settled? 

A pleasing and gracious miracle confirmed 
the choice of Jehovah, 
and assigned the priest- 
hood, without further 
controversy, to the 
tribe of Levi. 

The chief prince of 
each tribe broughtforth 
a rod or staff, the sym- 
bol of his tribal author- 
ity, with his name en- 
graven upon it, and these twelve rods were laid 
up in the most holy place before the Ark of the 
Testimony. The next morning the twelve 
princes assembled at the tabernacle, and the 
rods were brought forth : 




PENTATEUCH. 189 



"And behold, the rod of Aaron for the house 
of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, 
and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.' 7 
Num. 17 : 8. 

This miraculous rod, by the command of God, 
was placed in the ark with the ten command- 
ments and the omer of manna, "to be kept for 
a token against the rebels." 



REMOVALS AND WANDERINGS. 

Many were the journey ings and encampments 
of the Israelites, during their long abode in the 
wilderness. They were removing from place 
to place for a period of thirty-eight years, rest- 
ing wherever they could find pasture for their 
flocks, and accommodation for their tents and 
households. We trace them now at the edge 
of the desert, and then again at the centre. 
They traverse the wilderness of Etham, of Zin, 
and of Sinai — led to and fro, as the pillar of 
cloud and fire directed. 

It was one design of God to root out of their 
minds all longing after Egypt and its idols — ■ 
to purify them from idolatry, and thus prepare 
them to destroy the false gods of Canaan. 

After thirty-eight years of wandering, the 



190 BIBLE STUDIES. 

new generation, emerging from the wilderness, 
encamp again at Kadesh. 



Two memorable events took place at Ka- 
desh : 

1. Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, 
died, and was buried there. 

2. The miracle of bringing water from the 
rock w^as repeated. The murmuring and strife 
of the people caused this also to be known as 
" the water of Meribah." 

The other Meribah was near mount Sinai, 
and the miracle there was performed soon 
after the departure from Egypt. 



OFFENCE OF MOSES AND AARON. 

In the strife at Meribah, not only was the 
multitude to blame, but Moses and Aaron also 
fell under the displeasure of the Lord. 

God commanded Moses to take the well- 
known rod, which had been used in the per- 
formance of so many wonders, and to speak to 
the rock, and it should pour forth water for all 
the people and their cattle to drink. 

Did Moses speak to the rock ? 

No; he spoke instead thereof to the people, 



PENTATEUCH. 191 

and he used words of indignation and re- 
proach. 

"Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you 
water out of this rock ?" 

And in his wrath he smote the rock twice. 
Water came forth abundantly ; God performed 
the miracle, but he punished Moses and Aaron 
by interdicting them from entering the prom- 
ised land. Great must be the "sinfulness of 
sin/ 7 if saints and prophets are thus punished 
for a single fault. 

" Ye shall not bring this congregation into the 
land which I have given them." Num. 20 : 12. 



DEATH OF AARON. 

They came to mount Hor, on the borders of 
Idumea, or the land of Edom. 

"And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, 
and put them upon Eleazar his son ; and Aaron 
died there in the top of the mount." Numbers 
20:28. 



DISCOURAGEMENT. 
The time has arrived for the host of Israel 
to enter Canaan, but the land of Edom lies in 
the way. 



192 BIBLE STUDIES. 

Will the king allow them to pass through his country ? 

No ; he will not. They will be obliged " to 
compass the land of Edom." The wilderness 
furnishes neither fruits nor water. Their only 
sustenance is the manna. 

What did the people say of it ? 

" Our soul loatheth this light bread." 

Upon whom did they throw the blame of their suffer- 
ings ? 

"And the people spake against God, and 
against Moses." 

What daring impiety is this ! Can they expect 
thai a righteous God will not chastise them? 



FIERY SERPENTS. 

The desert through which they were travel- 
ling was infested with "fiery flying serpents," 
which the restraining hand of God would have 
prevented from harming the people, had they 
not rebelled against him. Now they are let 
loose, and they invade the camp, stinging, poi- 
soning, and causing death. 

"And much people of Israel died." 

Are the murmurers convinced of their sin ? 

How do they manifest their penitence ? 

Who intercedes for them? 

" And Moses prayed for the people." 



PENTATEUCH. 



193 




THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 

Repentance and prayer are well pleasing in 
the sight of God. 

Moses exhibits a noble and forgiving spirit 
in praying for those who had so recently shown 
themselves his enemies. 

It is godlike to forgive injuries. 

What is the Christian precept in regard to enemies ? 



In answer to the prayer of Moses, God com- 
manded him to make a serpent of brass, in imi- 

Bib. Stud. Yl 



194 BIBLE STUDIES. 

tation of the fiery serpents, and to raise it on a 
staff or pole, as a standard, that could be seen 
from all parts of the camp. 

Behold the wonderful effect: whoever was 
stung by the serpents, was healed by looking 
at the brazen image! The great power of God 
alone could give efficacy to such means. 

In faith they obeyed God, and he by his 
miraculous intervention healed them. 

Is not this a memorable type of Christ our Saviour? 

He was raised upon the cross, and by look- 
ing at him in faith we are redeemed from the 
sting of death, and the power of Satan. 

Christ, though in himself without spot or 
stain, was made in the likeness of sinful flesh, 
and being lifted up, he says to all mankind, 

"Look unto me, and be ye saved. 7 ' 



"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wil- 
derness, even so must the Son of man be lifted 
up: that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have eternal life." John 3 : 14. 



Happy are the people who live in these days 
of gospel light, and love the gospel law, the 
law of faith. On them are poured forth the 



PENTATEUCH. 195 



gifts of the Spirit; they see the dawn of the 
Sua of righteousness. 

In the judgments of God inflicted upon the 
Israelites for their sins, we see the great neces- 
sity of man for the knowledge of salvation 
through faith in Christ. 

The believing Israelite indeed obtained mer- 
cy, but only through faith, and faith is the gift 
of God. 

It is all of faith. Miracles without the 
influence of the Spirit, producing faith, have 
no efficiency to make men love God. 



BALAAM. 

Balaam was a renowned magician, living on 
the Euphrates, in the province of Aram, or 
Mesopotamia. This was the native land of 
Terah and of Abraham, where, among the de- 
scendants of Shem, some knowledge of the true 
God was still to be found. 

Balaam had become famous for his wisdom 
and sagacity, but we learn from his history 
that he was proud, avaricious, and corrupt. 
He had some right conceptions of the holiness 
of God, and of the spiritual manner in which 
he should be worshipped ; but in practice he 



196 BIBLE STUDIES. 

was an idolater, and pretended to foretell 
events by omens and charms. 

The king of Moab sent for Balaam to come 
to him, and curse the Israelites. He attributed 
such power to Balaam's curse, that he expected 
by that means to drive the host of Israel from 
his dominions. 

God appeared to Balaam in the night, and 
told him he might go: yet it is said, "God's 
anger was kindled because he went." 

How is this ? 

Jehovah was angry because Balaam's heart 
was corrupt, and his motives wrong. He went, 
not from obedience to God, but because he 
desired to obtain the rewards and honors held 
out to him by the king of Moab. 

"Balaam the son of Bosor loved the wages 
of unrighteousness." 2 Peter 2 : 15. 



BALAAM AND HIS ASS. 

How was Balaam obstructed in his journey? 

There are three miraculous points in this 
story : 1. The appearance of the angel. 2. That 
the beast saw him when Balaam did not. 
3. That the beast spoke, and reproved its 
master. 



PENTATEUCH. 197 

"The Lord opened the mouth of the ass." 
The animal uttered the words without com- 
prehending their import. This might show 
Balaam, that whatever were his own wicked 
designs, he was acting under the control of 
almighty power. 

Was it Balaam's intention to bless, or to curse the 
Israelites ? 

To curse them, undoubtedly ; it was not in 

his heart to pronounce a blessing: but God 

restrained him from cursing, and forced him to 

bless; a greater miracle than giving speech to* 

a passive animal. 



BALAAM'S PROPHECIES. 

Balaam, under the influence of the Spirit of 
God, uttered several remarkable prophecies. 

He was a bad man ; his heart was not in his 
words; but God overruled his wicked desires, 
and caused him to speak as the Spirit dictated. 
He "heard the words of God/ 7 and "saw the 
vision of the Almighty. 77 

"The Spirit of God came upon him. 77 

These prophecies were, 

1. That the Israelites should remain a dis- 
tinct and peculiar nation: "The people shall 

17* 



198 BIBLE STUDIES. 

dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among 
the nations." 

2. That they should be a great and numerous 
people: "Who can count the dust of Jacob, 
and the number of the fourth part of Israel? 77 

3. That they should triumph over their ene- 
mies: "Behold, the people shall rise up as a 
great lion/ 7 etc. "He shall eat up the nations 
of his enemies. 77 

4. That they should be a highly favored, holy, 
and glorious people. "How goodly are thy 
tents. Jacob, and thy tabernacles, Israel. 77 

5. That at some distant period there should 
come a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre should 
rise out of Israel, whose dominion should ex- 
tend over Moab, Edom, Seir, and all the chil- 
dren of Seth. 

6. That the Amalekites should be destroyed 
as a nation. "His latter end shall be, that he 
perish for ever. 77 

7. That the Kenites should gradually decay, 
and be carried into captivity to Assyria. 

8. That at length a people coming in ships 
from the coast of Chittim, should conquer 
Ashur and Eber, " and he also shall perish for- 
ever. 77 



PENTATEUCH. 199 



"The star of Jacob and sceptre of Israel/ 7 
can refer only to the Messiah. This remarka- 
ble prediction is clothed in language of great 
strength and beauty. 



Ashur is a name for Assyria. Eber desig- 
nates the Hebrews, or nation of the Jews. 
" The people from the coast of Chittim 77 were, 

1. Alexander and his successors from Mace- 
donia, who made great conquests in the East. 

2. The Romans, who subdued Assyria and 
Judea, and were themselves afterwards de- 
stroyed as a nation. 



Balaam 7 s predictions extend over the whole 
world as known to the ancients, and comprise 
at least fifteen centuries. History shows that 
they have all been fulfilled. 



. What was the wish of Balaam, as he contemplated 
the future glory of the chosen people of God? 

"Let me die the death of the righteous, and 
let my last end be like his! 77 Num. 23 : 10. 

What was the "last end," or death of Balaam? 

He died in battle, fighting with the Midian- 
ites against Israel. Num. 31 : 8. 



200 BIBLE STUDIES. 

CHARACTER OF BALAAM. 

The character of Balaam was full of incon- 
sistencies. He knew what was right, but de- 
liberately chose the way of evil. 

He was favored with divine communications, 
yet had recourse to superstitious enchantments. 

He foretold that the Israelites would glo- 
riously conquer and prevail over their enemies, 
yet suggested to the Moabites plans for de- 
stroying them. 

He expressed the devout wish of dying like 
the righteous, yet rushed madly into battle with 
a nation of idolaters, and died as the fool dieth. 

So great is the difference between thinking, 
and acting right — between mere conviction of 
sin, and true repentance unto life — between 
worldly wisdom, and obedience to the com- 
mands of God. 



WARS OF THE LORD. 

"Wherefore it is said in the book of the 
wars of the Lord." Num. 21 : 14. 

The book here quoted is not now extant. It 
may have been a book of annals ; or perhaps a 
book of psalms and hymns, celebrating the vie- 



PENTATEUCH. , 201 



tories of the Israelites, and composed and sung 
at the time of the events. 

The Israelites were commanded to keep a 
record of all important events, that the know^ 
ledge of them might not be lost. 

"And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this 
for a memorial in a book.' 7 Exod. 17 : 14. 

The wars of the Lord before crossing the 
Jordan, and under the command of Moses : 

War with Amalek, second year after the 
departure. Exod. 17. 

War with Arad the Canaanite. Num. 21. 

War with Sihon king of the Amorites. 
Num. 21. 

War with Og king of Bashan. Num. 21. 

War with the Midianites. Num. 31. 

These were mostly wars of extermination. 
All were slain: "none were left alive.' 7 In 
the case of the Midianites, those that were at 
first spared as captives, were afterwards put 
to death. 
Does this seem incompatible with God's character? 

Let it be remembered, that the Midianites 
were condemned to death for their numerous 
crimes, and particularly for alluring the Israel- 



202 BIBLE STUDIES. 

ites into idolatry, and this was a military exe- 
cution of the sentence. A plague, or any 
miraculous agent might have done the work, 
but Jehovah the sovereign God thought best 
to make the Israelites his avengers, that they 
might know the fierceness of his wrath against 
such bold transgressors, and learn to 

" Fear God, and keep his commandments." 



OG, KING OF BASHAN. 

Bashan was a very fruitful country, north 
of the mountains of Gilead, and east of the Jor- 
dan. It " was called the land of the giants." 

Og, the king of the country, was the last of 
this race of giants. His bedstead of iron was 
nine cubits in length, that is, thirteen feet and 
a half. It was long preserved at Rabbath, by 
the Ammonites. Deut. 3:11. 

A cubit is eighteen inches. 

This giant king was probably about ten feet 
high. The Israelites fought with him at Edrei, 
where he and his whole army were slain, and 
the conquerors took possession of his land. He 
had threescore cities, "fenced with high walls, 
gates, and bars; besides unwalled towns a 
great many." Deut. 3 : 5. 



PENTATEUCH. 203 



GIANTS. 

A race of " giants and mighty men of re- 
nown" flourished before the flood. These 
were doubtless tyrants, plunderers, and self- 
appointed rulers. 

The Rephaim, Zuzim, and Emim, were tribes 
or families of men of extraordinary stature, and 
warlike propensities. They are noticed in the 
days of Abraham. Gen. 14 : 5. 

The Rephaim dwelt at Bashan; the Zuzim 
were Ammonites, and the Emim, Moabites. 

Tile Anakim, or sons of Anak, were a gigan- 
tic race that possessed Hebron on the southern 
border of Canaan. They were of such enor- 
mous size that the Israelites appeared as grass- 
hoppers in comparison. Num. 13 :33. 

The Zamzummim are described as "a peo- 
ple great ?,nd many, and tall as the Anakim." 
Deut. 2 : 20. These were perhaps identical 
with the Zuzim. 

Og, the giant king of Bashan, was an Amo- 
rite, and probably one of the Rephaim. Bashan 
was called "the land of giants." Deut. 3:13. 

No other giants are mentioned in the writ- 
ings of Moses. 



204 BIBLE STUDIES. 



In the time of David, a remnant of giants 
remained among the Philistines. The princi- 
pal one was Goliath of Gath, "whose height 
was six cubits and a span," that is, nine feet 
and a half. 1 Sam. 17. 

Four other giants of Gath, of the same fam- 
ily with Goliath, were slain by David's mighty 
men. 2 Sam. 21 : 16-22. 

Benaiah, one of David's officers, slew also an 
Egyptian who was five cubits, or seven feet 
and a half high. 

All these men were rebels against God. It 
is worthy of note that no giant is mentioned in 
Scripture with approbation — showing that phys- 
ical advantages, without holiness of heart, are 
of no value in the sight of God. 

Had they been good men, the possession of 
great strength and power would have enabled 
them to become eminent benefactors of their 
race. But being unholy, and under the sway 
of violent and selfish passions, the extraordi- 
nary personal gifts bestowed upon them were 
perverted to evil purposes, and made them 
eminent only as barbarians and oppressors. 



PENTATEUCH. 205 



DEUTERONOMY. 



Behold the second, or repeated law, 
Which Moses spoke, and Israel heard with awe ! 
Some thirty days' adventures briefly given, 
The great lawgiver then ascends to heaven. 



PRAYER OF MOSES DENIED. 

"I besought the Lord at that time, saying, I 
pray thee, let me go over and see the good 
land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly moun- 
tain, and Lebanon. 

"The Lord said unto me, Let it suffice thee; 
speak no more to me of this matter. Get thee 
up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine 
eyes westward and northward, and southward 
and eastward, and behold it with thine eyes ; 
for thou shalt not go over this Jordan. 77 Deut. 
3 : 23-27. 



Moses was resigned to the will of God, sor- 
rowful, but believing. 

18 



206 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



' I must die in this land , I 

■ mustnotgo over Jordan; 

but ye shall go over, and 

possess that good 

land," 
100 Deut. 4:22. 




See aged Moses, Israel's setting sun, 
His glory leaving to the son of Nun : 
" Go on, be strong, lead over Jordan's tide ; 
Possess the land : Jehovah is thy guide." 



THE REPEATED LAWS. 

What was the argument of Moses against the wor- 
ship of images? 

"The Lord spake unto you out of the midst 
of the fire ; ye heard the voice of the words, 
but saw no similitude/' Deut. 4 : 12 



PENTATEUCH. 207 



"Take ye therefore good heed unto your- 
selves, lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make 
you a graven image, the similitude of any 
figure, the likeness of male or female. For ye 
saw no manner of similitude on the day that 
the Lord spake unto you in Horeb. 77 Deut. 
4:15, 16. 

These precepts not only forbid the worship 
of false gods, but also the worship of the true 
God through the medium of visible images and 
symbols. 

When Moses repeats the Ten Commandments, what 
additional words of Jehovah are given? 

" Oh that there were such a heart in them, 
that they would fear me, and keep all my com- 
mandments always, that it might be well with 
them, and with their children for ever! 77 



SUMMARY OF THE LAW. 

" Hear, O Israel : The Lord our God is one 
Lord. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and 
with all thy might. 77 Deut. 6 :4, 5. 



208 BIBLE STUDIES. 

How are the precepts and commands of God to be 
maintained in the heart and in the family? 

By meditation on God's word. 

By the religious instruction of children. 

By conversation on divine things. 

By frequent review of God's commands. 

All these points are enumerated by Moses : 

'• These words shall be in thy heart. 

"Thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy 
children. 

" Thou shalt talk of them when thou sittest 
in thy house, and when thou walkest by the 
way, and when thou liest down, and when thou 
risest up. 

"Thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy 
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between 
thine eyes. 

"And thou shalt write them upon the posts 
of thy house, and on thy gates." Deut. 6 : 6-9. 



The ancient Jews were in the habit of bind- 
ing upon their wrists and their foreheads, 
pieces of parchment on which passages of Scrip- 
ture which they desired to remember were 
written. These were called signs and frontlets. 



PENTATEUCH. 209 



There is no necessity for this at the present 
day. It is obviated by the art of printing and 
the diffusion of Bibles. These great blessings 
of the present age were unknown to the an- 
cients. 

What special benevolent precepts are enjoined by 
Moses? 

To remember with kindness and assistance 
the Levite, the stranger, the poor, the widow, 
and the fatherless. 

To be merciful to brutes. 

To restore lost animals to their owners. 

To be careful of human life. Deut. 22 : 8. 

To be kind and just towards hired servants, 
avoiding all oppression. 



MAGICAL ARTS. 

These were practised by idolatrous nations, 
but forbidden by the laws of Moses. 

" When thou art come into the land which 

the Lord thy God giveth thee, there shall not 

be found among you any that useth divination, 

or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a 

witch, or a charmer, or a consul ter with familiar 
18* 



210 BIBLE STUDIES. 

spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer," Deut. 
18:9-11. 

Such impostors were to be cut off, because 
they practised arts of a foolish and sinful na- 
ture. They pretended to discover lost things, 
to foretell future events, and to make fortune 
favorable or unfavorable, either by interpreta- 
tion of signs and omens, or by appealing to 
evil demons, or the spirits of the dead. 



LAWS DESIGNED TO GUARD AGAINST 
SPECIAL EVILS. 

"Thou shalt not seethe a kid in its mother's 
milk. 77 Deut. 14:21. 

This command is three times repeated. It 
is supposed to allude to some idolatrous rite, 
or to a practice common among sorcerers and 
magicians, and not to any particular mode of 
cookery then in use. It was the superstition 
connected with the act that caused it to be 
prohibited. 



"He shall not multiply horses unto himself." 
Deut. 17 : 16, 



PENTATEUCH. 211 



The horse is a noble animal, useful to man, 
and in some countries almost indispensable; 
but several weighty reasons can be assigned 
why the multiplication of horses should be for- 
bidden to the Israelites : 

1. It might be the means of renewing their 
intercourse with Egypt, which was the most 
noted country for horses. 

2. The horse is not particularly well adapt- 
ed to assist in agriculture, which was the prin- 
cipal business of the people. 

3. It was not necessary as a means of defence, 
on account of the nature of the country, which 
was hilly, with many abrupt mountains and 
deep ravines, to which the inhabitants could 
retreat from an invading enemy. 

4. The possession of a body of cavalry might 
tempt the people to undertake foreign con- 
quests, which was contrary to God's design, 
that they should remain separate from other 
nations. 

A king could have no object in multiplying 
horses except for purposes of display, or to be 
used in foreign wars and conquests. 

Thus Ave see that this was a kind and judi- 
cious regulation. 



212 BIBLE STUDIES. 

'THE LAW, AND THE TESTIMONY. " 
The laws of Moses are both comprehensive 
and minute. No other lawgiver of ancient 
times took such care to guard his people 
against the numerous evils to which they were 
exposed. 

Moses was led by the Holy Spirit to frame 
a body of rules and regulations exactly adapt- 
ed to the character and circumstances of the 
Hebrew nation. And though some of these 
laws may seem to relate to things indifferent, 
or of little moment, yet, when closely studied, 
each particular command will be found to em- 
body some wise, benevolent, and holy purpose. 
The laws of Moses are the laws of Gocl. 



Of what were the children of Israel and the various 
circumstances of their history types ? 

Of Christ and his church. 1 Cor. 1.0 : 1-4. 

Their deliverance from Egyptian bondage 
was a type of our redemption from sin; the 
barren wilderness that they passed through, 
of the afflictions of this life; Moses, their 
leader and lawgiver, of Christ; the Red sea, 
of baptism; manna, of the spiritual bread, or 



PENTATEUCH. 213 

doctrine of salvation by Christ, which nour- 
ishes the soul; and Canaan was a type of 
heaven. 

What were the six nations that the Israelites were 
to drive from the Promised Land? 

The Hittites, Perizzites, Aniorites, Hivites, 
Canaanites, and Jebusites. 

"Why was the decree of utter extermination pro- 
nounced against them? 

"Thou shalt save alive nothing that breath- 
eth." 

On account of their abominations, " the land 
was sick of them." Idolatrv of the worst kind, 
accompanied with human sacrifices, and every 
species of vice and pollution, was universal. 
Their iniquity was full. 

God pronounced the sentence of extirpation, 
that the earth might be relieved from the 
guilty race. 



IDOLS OF THE HEATHEN. 
Moloch was the bloody deity of the Am- 
monites. His principal sacrifices were human 
victims. Parents were often so deluded as to 



214 BIBLE STUDIES. 

offer up their children to be thrown into the 
flames and consumed, in honor of this hideous 
idol. 

Baal was a similar god, worshipped by sev- 
eral tribes of the Canaanites. He is supposed 
to be the same as Bel and Belus of the Baby- 
lonians, and to represent the sun. The plural 
of Baal is Baalim. 

Baal-zebul was the idol-god of Ekron, one 
of the cities of Canaan. This is the same as 
Beelzebub, a name which the Jews gave to 
Satan. 

Milcom is called " the abomination of the 
Ammonites/ 7 1 Kings 11:5. Malcham was 
probably the same idol. Zeph. 1 : 5. 

Dagon was an idol, the lower part of whose 
body represented a fish. He was worshipped 
by the Philistines, and had a " house " or temple 
both at Gaza and Ashdocl. 

Ashtoreth (plural Ashtaroth) was the name 
of a goddess worshipped by the Zidonians. 

Chemosh was " the abomination of Moab." 

These are specimens of the vile and cruel 
gods worshipped by the Canaanites. Altars 
were dedicated to them on the high hills, and 
amid the thick groves, where they were wor- 



PENTATEUCH. 215 



shipped with many cruel and superstitious 
ceremonies. 

God commanded that all these evidences of 
idolatry should be destroyed. 

11 Ye shall overthrow their altars, and break 
their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; 
and ye shall hew down the graven ^images of 
their gods." Deut. 12 : 3. 



Are all heathen nations idolaters ? 

They are; and even at the present day a 
large portion of the human race are bowing 
down in daily worship before senseless images 
that their own hands have made. 

How vast the difference between the light 
and liberty of the gospel, and the darkness and 
bondage of heathenism! 

Christian, pity the heathen world, and 
let the burden of every prayer be. that God 
would make known his "saving health to all 
nations." 



Are heathens the only idolaters ? 

They are not. In Christian lands, where 
men are too well educated to worship idols, 



216 BIBLE STUDIES. 

numbers are guilty of heart idolatry ; pursuing 
earthly gratifications with an intensity of de- 
votion that dethrones the most high God, and 
places some earthly object of pursuit in his 
stead. This idolatry may be as offensive to 
Him who reads the heart, as the external wor- 
ship of images. 



PROPHECIES OF MOSES. 

First prophecy : that God would raise up in 
future times a Prophet like himself. 

" The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee 
a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy breth- 
ren, like unto me." Deut. 18 : 15. 

A Prophet like Moses must be a lawgiver 
sent from God, and the founder of a new dis- 
pensation. In all the law of Moses there is no 
revelation of Christ so clear as this. 

'•This is of a truth that Prophet that should 
come into the world." John 6 : 14. 

Christ says of Moses, " He wrote of me." 
John 5 : 46. 



Second prophecy : the captivity of the Jews 
in Babylon. 

" The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king 



PENTATEUCH. 217 

which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation 
which neither thou nor thy fathers have 
known," Deut. 28 : 36. 



Third prophecy : the dispersion of the Jews. 

"And thou shalt become an astonishment, a 
proverb, and a by-word, among all nations 
whither the Lord shall lead thee." Deut. 
28 : 37, etc. 

A dispersion like this has not happened to 
any other nation on the earth. 



Fourth prophecy : the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem by the Romans, with several striking cir- 
cumstances of the siege. 

"The Lord shall bring a nation against thee 
from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as 
the eagle flieth,' 1 etc. Deut. 28 : 49. 



The last solemn blessing of Moses upon the 
tribes of Israel, is blended with prophetic reve- 
lations of their future destiny. 



WRITINGS OF MOSES. 

"And it came to pass when Moses had made 
an end of writing the words of this law in a 

Bib Stud. 19 



218 BIBLE STUDIES. 

book, until they were finished, that Moses com- 
manded the Levites which bare the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord, saying, Take this book 
of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of 
the covenant of the Lord your God." Deut. 
31 : 24-26. 

In the time of Moses, the skins of goats and 
other animals were used for writing. They 
were prepared for that purpose, and fastened 
together so as to form strips many yards in 
length, which might be rolled up into a com- 
pact volume or book. 

Moses covered many such rolls with his 
writing. He was the greatest author of an- 
cient times. 

In the book of Genesis, he gathered up and 
transcribed in order, under the guidance of the 
Holy Spirit, the old patriarchal records. In 
the succeeding books of the Pentateuch, he 
registered the dealings of Jehovah with the 
Israelites; the first law, with all its minute 
details; and the second law, an abridgment 
of the first, but with many important and in- 
teresting additions. 

I 



PENTATEUCH. 219 



God gave the thought, but Moses held the pen, 
While light and truth were clothed in words for men. 
Lo, as the parchment takes the stamp divine, 
A hovering brightness flows along the line. 



WRITING MATERIALS IN ALL AGES. 

1. The first writing was engraved on rocks, 
pillars, and tables of stone. The 'Ten Com- 
mandments were written on two stone tables 
or tablets. It is supposed that these were 
slabs or plates of stone, fitted to each other, 
with the writing on the inside, so that they 
could be opened and read like a book. This 
sacred book of the Testimony was kept in the 
Ark. 

The earliest books of which there is any 
account in history were of this kind — tablets 
of stone. 

2. Afterwards tablets of wood were used, 
and also leaves of copper and lead, which 
might be fastened together in the form of a 
book. The writing on these metallic plates 
was executed with an iron pen or style. Some- 
times the style was tipped with diamond: 

"The sin of Judah is written with a pen of 



220 BIBLE STUDIES. 

iron, and with the point of a diamond/' Jer. 
17:1. 

3. The inner bark of trees was sometimes 
used for temporary purposes. This material 
for writing was not confined to the old world. 
The aboriginal tribes of America were accus- 
tomed to convey information by figures and 
hieroglyphics made upon strips of smooth 
white bark. 

4. Leaves of trees, such as the palm and 
palmyra leaf were used by some nations, the 
words being traced with a sharp instrument. 
This mode is still used in some parts of 
Asia. 

5. Paper, made from the papyrus, a species 
of sedge very common in the Nile. This arti- 
cle was confined principally to Egypt. 

6. Skins of goats, sheep, and perhaps other 
animals, forming rolls or volumes. This was 
the material used by Moses. The earlier cop- 
ies of the law, and the most ancient records 
of the Jews, were long preserved in these goat- 
skin volumes. 

7. Parchment, which is a preparation of 
skins, smoothed and prepared expressly for 
writing. The rolls of the law used at the 



PENTATEUCH. 221 



present day in the synagogues of the Jews, are 
written on parchment. 

8. From the use of parchment to the manu- 
facture of paper made from linen, a vast step 
was taken in the march of improvement. The 
first paper of this kind is said to have been 
made a. d. 1319. A still greater advance 
was made in the fifteenth century, when the 
art of printing superseded the use of the style 
and the pen. 

The Scriptures can now be multiplied to 
almost any extent, and no man in a Christian 
country need be without a copy. The printed 
Bible is a great blessing to mankind. 



DEATH OF MOSES. 

Repeated messages of Jehovah have warned 
Moses of his approaching death. How solemn 
and thoughtful are the preparations for that 
great event! How minute his directions to 
the Israelites ; how large the reach of his ordi- 
nances! 

His last words, his last cares, are devoted to 
the welfare of that great people whom he 
leaves behind. All is done wisely and com- 

19* 



222 



BIBLE STUDIES. 




pactly. He gathers up 
remembrances from behind; he 
opens vistas of prophecy for the 
future, extending through many ages. 
Joshua is to be his successor. 

Is he not well fitted for this great office ? 

He has been the assistant of Moses for forty 
years, and the lawgiver knows that he will 
follow in his steps. 

The affairs of the people on the east side of 
Jordan are settled. Moses has repeated all 
the general and moral precepts of the law, in 
a manner calculated to impress them on the 
hearts of the people. He binds the Israelites 
to the service of God by a series of blessings 



PENTATEUCH. 223 



and curses bearing the divine sanction ; and 
now all things are ready to pass over Jordan 
and enter Canaan, except the death of the 
leader. Moses must first die. 

Alone he ascends the mountain chain of 
Abarim: that particular mountain is called 
Nebo, and its highest summit is Pisgah. 

How sad must have been the parting scene 
at the foot of that mount! — sad, yet, by faith 
and hope, brightened and made sublime. 

On this mountain peak Moses stood, and the 
Lord showed him all the land of Canaan, "unto 
the utmost sea/ 7 And he said to him, 

" This is the land which I sware unto Abra- 
ham, and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I 
will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee 
to see it with thine eyes, but thou shaft not go 
over thither. 77 Deut. 34 : 4. 

There Moses died, being a hundred anfi 
twenty years old. 

God buried him in some valley near the 
mountain, but no man knoweth of his sepul- 
chre unto this day. No pilgrimages are there- 
fore made to his shrine; superstition and idol- 
atry are precluded from worshipping his re- 
mains. 



224 



BIBLE STUDIES. 



See Moses on the mountain peak sublime ; 
He gazes long, then vanishes from time. 
Farewell, thou hero of the shining face ; 
Great Hebrew chieftain, angel of thy race. 
Thou too, farewell, wonder-working rod ; 
Lie down with him beneath the unknown sod : 
He slumbers sweetly, buried by his God. 




GLOSSARY 



OP 



VARIOUS WORDS, PHRASES, AND GEO- 
GRAPHICAL TERMS. 



Land of Havilah. — Gen. 2 : 11. Probably the north- 
eastern part of Arabia, near the Persian gulf. 

Bdellium. — Gen. 2: 12. Not the gum-resin of that name, 
but some kind of precious stone, and most likely the pearl, 
as the grains of manna were said to resemble bdellium. 
Num. 11: 7. 

Onyx. — Gen. 2:12. A precious stone, in color like the 
semicircular spot at the base of the human nail. The orig- 
inal meaning of the word onyx is nail. 

Ethiopia. — Gen. 2 : 13. This does not here allude to the 
country of that name in Africa, but to an oriental province 
called Cush, or Ethiopia, that lay eastward of Eden. 

Assyria. — Gen. 2 : 14. The original province of Assyria 
was on the south of Armenia, and is now called Kurdistan. 

Brass.— Gen. 4 : 22. The brass known at the present 
day is not found in a pure state, but is a mixed metal form- 
ed of copper and zinc. Copper is supposed to be the metal 
intended whenever brass is mentioned in the Old Testa- 
ment. 

Cherubim. — Gen. 3 : 24. An order of celestial beings 
performing the will of God. 

"Sons or God" — "daughters of men." — Gen. 6:2. 
Probably the pious descendants of Seth, and idolatrous off- 



226 GLOSSARY. 



spring of Cain ; or generally, the true worshippers of God, 
and corrupt unbelievers. 

Mountains of Ararat. — Gen. 8 : 4. These are in Arme- 
nia. The loftiest summit of the ridge, supposed to be the 
one on which the ark rested, is 16,000 feet high, and cover- 
ed with perpetual snow. 

Eber. — Gen. 10 : 24. Eber was the great-grandson of 
Shem, and the ancestor of Abraham. The name is some- 
times written Heber, and is the origin of the term Hebrew, 
which was first applied to Abraham, Gen. 14 : 13 ; after- 
wards to the whole nation of the Israelites. 

"One language and one speech." — Gen. 11:1. This 
original language is supposed to have been the Hebrew in 
its pure state. The Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, and other an- 
cient languages of Western Asia, resemble the Hebrew suf- 
ficiently to show a common origin. As the whole human 
race are descended from the same ancestors, so it is believed 
that all the dialects on the earth can be traced back to one 
original language. 

Land of Shinar. — Gen. 11 : 2. The country which lay 
near the junction of the Tigris and Euphrates, where Baby- 
lon was situated. 

Yale of Siddim. — Gen. 14 : 10. A beautiful and fertile 
plain south of the Dead sea, well watered, and compared to 
the garden of the Lord, in which stood the cities of Sodom 
and Gomorrah before they were destroyed. 

Damascus. — Gen. 14 : 15. This is the first notice of Da- 
mascus. It is not mentioned again till the time of David. 

Shur. — Gen. 16 : 7. A city on the north-east border of 
Egypt ; probably where Suez now stands. 

Sarai, Sarah. — Gen. 17 : 15. Sarai signifies a princess; 
Sarah is a more comprehensive term, implying the princess, 
by way of eminence ; or as it is afterwards intimated, prin- 
cess of nations. 

"A SMOKING FURNACE AND A BURNING LAMP." — Gen. 

15 : 17. These were symbols of the Divine presence that 



GLOSSARY. 22T 



appeared in ratification of the covenant with Abraham. 
The pillar of cloud and pillar of fire that accompanied the 
Israelites in the wilderness were symbols of the same import. 

Washing the feet. — Gen. 18 : 4. This is a common act 
of hospitality proffered to travellers in the East. The feet, 
only partially protected by sandals, become parched and 
irritated by journeying over rugged hills or sandy plains, 
and washing is a great refreshment. 

Beer-sheba.— Gen. 21:31. "The well of the oath." 
This is at the most southern part of Palestine, twenty-five 
miles south of Hebron. 

City or Nahor, — Gen. 24 : 10. Haran, where Nahor had 
been left by Abram when he departed for Canaan. 

"Two bracelets of ten shekels weight of gold." — 
Gen. 24 : 22. This weight represents four ounces and a 
half ; a heavy weight for bracelets, but they are often worn 
as large in modern times. 

Lentiles. — Gen. 25 : 34. A kind of beans. 

Judith. — Gen. 26 : 34. The name of Esau's wife. It is 
the feminine of Judah. 

"Leah was tender-eyed."' — Gen. 29:17. This was 
some blemish in the eyes of Leah which caused her to be 
contrasted with her fairer sister Eachel, but its exact nature 
cannot be determined. 

Jacob poured oil upon the pillar. — Gen. 28 : 18. This 
oil was probably a part of the supply of provisions he had 
taken with him for his journey. Olive oil is much used 
with food in eastern countries. 

Mandrake. — Gen. 30 : 14. A plant bearing a fruit like 
a small apple. It is of an agreeable odor, and is used for 
food. 

Tabret. — Gen. 31 : 27. A small instrument of the drum 
kind. 

"Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac " — Gen. 
31 : 53. That is, by Him before whom his father Isaac 
bowed in holy fear and adoration. 



228 GLOSSARY. 



He shaved niMSELF. — Gen 41 : 14. Shaving was cus- 
tomary among the Egyptians, bat other oriental nations 
carefully cherished the beard. 

Land of Goshen. — Gen. 46 : 28. A province in the north- 
eastern part of Egypt, next to Arabia ; Rameses was its 
chief city. 

Horeb, "the mountain of God." — Exod. 3 : 1. This ap- 
pears to be the same as Sinai, except that it is sometimes 
used in a more general sense for the whole ridge, of which 
Sinai is the sacred summit. 

A bunch of hyssop. — Exod. 12 : 22. The hyssop was prob- 
ably a low, rough shrub, very much branched ; but the par- 
ticular plant is not known. 

Timbrel. — Exod. 15 : 20. An instrument of music con- 
sisting of a hoop, over which a skin is drawn, and the rim 
hung with small bells. It is shaken and beaten with the 
hand. 

Palm-trees. —Exod. 15 : 27. The date palm is one of the 
noblest of trees, and an unerring sign of water. 

Paved-work of a sapphire-stone. — Exod. 24 : 10. The 
sapphire is of various shades of blue, from the lightest tint 
of azure to a deep indigo. Next after the diamond it is 
the most valuable of gems, exceeding all others in lustre 
and hardness. 

Shittim-wood. — Exod. 25 : 10. The particular tree which 
furnished this wood is not known. The boards and pillars 
of the tabernacle, the ark, the table before the ark, and the 
staves with which these sacred articles were lifted and 
borne, were of shittim-wood. Some have supposed it to be 
the black Acacia, a species of the locust that grows in the 
deserts of Arabia, the wood of which is hard, smooth, and 
durable. 

Holy anointing oil. — Exod. 80 : 25. Anointing or pour- 
ing oil upon the head of the priests, was an emblem of the 
gifts and graces necessary to qualify them for their holy 
office. The anointing oil was composed of myrrh, cinna- 



GLOSSARY. 229 



mon, calamus, cassia, and oil-olive. Cinnamon and cassia 
are sweet spices prepared from the bark of certain trees ; 
myrrh is an aromatic gum; and calamus is a species of 
odoriferous grass or reed. 

The sacred incense. — Exod. 30 : 34. This was composed 
of stacte, onycha, galbanum, and frankincense. Onycha is a 
word which occurs nowhere else, but is supposed to be the 
shell of a species of muscle, which, when burned, emits a 
sweet odor. The other ingredients were gums, exuding 
from different trees, but all of strong aromatic odor. The 
sacred incense was used to perfume the sanctuary. 

In earing-time. — Exod. 34 : 21. Earing is an old English 
term for ploughing. 

Looking-glasses of the women. — Exod. 38 : 8. These 
were small metallic mirrors, probably of polished copper. 

The twelve stones of the breastplatf. — Exod. 36: 10»J 4. 
The color of most of the precious gems varies considerably 
in different specimens, but the ordinary color is as follows : 

1. Sardius ; the modern carnelian, blood-red, and also 
flesh color. 

2. Topaz ; yellow in every degree of shade. 

3. Carbuncle ; dark red. 

4. Emerald ; a fine green. 

5. Sapphire ; all the shades of blue. 

6. Diamond ; colorless ; the hardest, purest, and most 
brilliant of all gems. 

7. Ligure ; a purplish red, or red with a tinge of yellow. 

8. Agate ; semi-transparent, often clouded, and with dark 
veins. 

9. Amethyst; violet-blue. 

10. Beryl ; sea-green. 

11. Onyx , cloudjr, or pinkish white. 

12. Jasper ; of different colors, green, purple, or light 
blue, and often beautifully striped. 

The blending of all these hues and rays must have pro- 
duced a dazzling and magnificent effect. 
20 



230 GLOSSARY. 



''The people of the land shall stone him with stones." 
— Lev. 20 : 2. This was the ordinary capital punishment 
of the Jews. Not a general pelting, which prolonged tor- 
ture, and would be a barbarous mode of punishing a crimi- 
nal, but sudden blows from persons standing near, which 
destroyed life at once. 

Nazarite. — Num. 6:1. A person engaged by a vow to 
abstain from the fruit of the vine in any form, either as 
food or drink ; to suffer his hair to grow, and to avoid all 
ceremonial pollution. 

Trumpets of silver. — Num. 10 : 2. Two trumpets of 
beaten silver were used to assemble the people at festivals 
and other solemn occasions, and to usher in the new year. 

A covenant of salt. — Num. 18 : 19. This represented a 
perpetual and incorruptible covenant. 

A red heifer. — Num. 19 : 2. This is the only instance 
in which the color of the victim is specified. 

Mount Hor, where aaron died. — Num. 20 : 27. The 
range of mountains called Seir stretches from the southern 
extremity of the Dead sea nearly to Ezion Geber, which is. 
at the head of the east branch of the Red sea. About mid- 
way in this range is the summit called mount Hor. 

Seven altars. — Num. 24 : 1. Seven was a mystical 
number with ancient magicians and sorcerers. The Israel- 
ites were commanded to have but one altar for sacrifice. 

Coast of Chittim. — Num. 24 : 24. The isles and coasts 
of the eastern part of the Mediterranean. Of similar import 
with the word Levant. 

Mount Hermon. — Deut. 3 : 8. The highest mountain in 
Syria, estimated to rise 10,000 feet above the sea. It be- 
longs to the range of Anti-Lebanon, and was beyond the 
sources of the Jordan, forming the northern boundary oi 
the country beyond Jordan. The copious dews that fell 
upon Hermon are compared in Scripture to the precious 
ointment upon the head of Aaron, and both are emblematic 
of spiritual blessings which refresh the hearts of men. 



GLOSSARY. 231 



Signs and frontlets. — Deut. 11 : 18. These were cer- 
tain passages of Scripture written upon pieces of parchment, 
and hound upon the forehead, or on the arms. They were 
originally designed as sacred memorials to he kept near at 
hand, and often studied, as one might now carry a selection 
of sacred texts in his pocket. But it afterwards degener- 
ated into a superstitious and hypocritical observance. In 
the time of our Saviour they were called phylacteries. 

Thou shalt not muzzle the ox, etc. — Deut. 25 : 4. This 
was a law of humanity to the ox, allowing him to taste the 
grain which he was employed in threshing. 

Abarim, Nebo, Pisgah. — Deut. 32: 49; 34: 1. A chain 
of mountains east of Jordan, nearly opposite to Jericho. 
It is probable that Abarim was the general name of the 
range, Nebo one of the mountains of this range, and Pisgah 
its most elevated and commanding peak. Moses was com- 
manded to go up to the mountain of Abarim, to mount Nebo, to 
the top of Pisgah. From this point he surveyed the prom- 
ised Land. 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS, 

WHICH MAY SERVE AS GROUNDWORK 
FOR QUESTIONS. 

VOL. I. 



PAGE. 

Meaning of Bible 9 

What is the Pentateuch 10 

Chronology of the creation 11 

Angels : fallen angels 12 

Angels of light 13 

The six-days work 14 

In what the image of God consisted 17 

The Sabbath rest 17 

Sabbath employments 17 

The first pair 19 

Origin of language 21 

Giving of names 21 

Fall of man 22 

Promise of a Saviour 23 

Beginning of public worship 25 

Origin of Sacrifices 26 

Most important of the sacrifices 27 

Difference between the offerings of Cain and Abel 28 

The first death 29 

The mark upon Cain — 30 

Children of Adam and Eve 31 

Chronology from Adam to Enoch 32 

The flood 32 

The great faith of Noah 32 

How long was the ark in building 33 

20* 



234 INDEX. 



Its form and size : Gopher-wood — 34 

The flood miraculous -. 34 

Mount Ararat 36 

The name Noah five times repeated 38 

Covenant with Noah - 38 

The bow in the cloud ; its office -- 39 

Covenant with Noah 39 

Antediluvian arts and occupations 40 

When the term of human life diminished 41 

Birds of Noah 41 

Grants of vegetable and animal food 42 

Three races descended from Noah 43 

Noah's prophecies 44 

Signification of Adam, Eve, Cain, Abel, Nod, Eden -- 45 

Where was Eden - - — 47 

The firstcity -- 47 

First pastoral chief 47 

Inventor of musical instruments 47 

First artificer in metals 48 

Man designed for social life 48 

Division in the days of Peleg 49 

First king and first kingdom 50 

Tower of Babel 50 

What language first spoken 52 

Terah and his three sons 53 

Abram changed to Abraham 53 

Abraham a pilgrim 53 

Abraham's faith 54 

Abimelech and Pharaoh 56 

Canaan promised to Abraham -- 57 

First battle recorded 58 

Extent of early kingdoms -- - - 58 

The majestic interview at Salem — 60 

Lot, and Lot's wife --• 62 

Hagar, the Egyptian - 64 

Who is meant by the Angel of the Lord - - - 1 65 



INDEX. 235 



Abraham's great trial ---- 66 

Sons of Abraham - - - ■-- 66 

Descendants of Ishmael --- 68 

Cave of Machpelah -- 69 

Mamre ; its meaning 70 

Sarah's age TO 

The six persons buried in Machpelah 70 

First money transaction recorded -- - — 70 

What was the shekel — when first coined - 71 

Journey of Abraham's servant 71 

Rebekah ; her character - 73 

Sons of Isaac - - 75 

Red pottage 75 

Birthright privileges 75" 

Wrong-doing of Rebekah, Isaac, and Jacob 76 

Jacob's dream -- --- - - 79 

Three meanings of well 80 

Jacob's long service - 80 

His departure from Haran 81 

The interview at Mizpah = 81 

Meaning of Mizpah 81 

Rachel's images or teraphim -- - 82 

Vision of angels 83 

Signification of Mahanaim 84 

Why Jacob was called Israel 86 

Meaning of Peniel 87 

National designations of the chosen people 87 

Meeting of Jacob and Esau - 87 

Wives and sons of Jacob - 89 

Death of Isaac - 91 

History of Joseph 91 

Joseph's Egyptian name - 106 

His wife and two sons -- — 106 

Removal of Jacob to Egypt - 117 

Why shepherds were odious to the Egyptians 120 

Symbols derived from the pastoral office 121 



236 INDEX. 



Death of Jacob 121 

Prophecy concerning Shiloh 122 

Embalming 123 

Death of Joseph ; his age 123 

The three distinct periods of his life 123 

Where and when buried 125 

Subjects of the book of Exodus 126 

Moses drawn from the river 128 

Trust in Providence 129 

Pharaoh's daughter 129 

Exile of Moses 130 

His wife and son 131 

Land of Midian 131 

♦What occurred at Horeb 131 

By what new name is Jehovah proclaimed 132 

What is a miracle ' 133 

The ten plagues 134 

The passover 135 

What Christian ordinance resembles it 136 

Christ our passover 136 

The departure from Egypt 137 

Borrowing 137 

The flight and pursuit 138 

Crossing the sea 140 

Song of triumph 141 

Three miracles in the wilderness 142 

Manna; "whatisit?" 143 

Fourth miracle 145 

The spiritual Rock 146 

When the law was given -■- 147 

Mount Sinai -- 148 

Relapse to idolatry 149 

The god of the Egyptians 150 

The breaking of the tables 150 

What was done with the calf 151 

The decalogue 152 



INDEX. 231 



Description of the tabernacle 152 

Its covering -- - 153 

What was in the holy place 154 

What in the most holy - - - 154 

What in the court - 155 

Division of the Mosaic laws - 155 

Leading precepts of the law - - 156 

Sacrifices where offered, and by whom 157 

Orders of priests - -- 157 

The High-priest 158 

The holy garments, and their divine meaning - - 159 

The ark of the covenant - 162 

Shittim-wood 162 

Altars and sacred vessels - 163 

Holy anointing oil 164 

The sacred incense -- 164 

Rearing of the tabernacle -- 165 

What was in the ark 165 

The divine presence - 165 

Subjects of the book of Leviticus -- 166 

Animals used in sacrifice 166 

Sprinkling of blood 167 

Meat-offerings -- -- --- 168 

From what the sacrifices derived their efficacy 168 

Clean and unclean animals 169 

Reasons for this distinction 170 

What we may learn from it 171 

Laws concerning leprosy 172 

What is leprosy of the soul 172 

Various objects of the Mosaic laws - 172 

Why blood forbidden for food 173 

Why certain mixtures forbidden 173 

Why forbidden to cut the hair in a certain way 174 

List of twenty-one precepts of the moral law 175 

The scape-goat ; its meaning -- — - 177 

Three annual religious festivals 178 



238 INDEX. 



When and why the passover kept 179 

The first month of the year 179 

Pentecost 179 

The feast of tabernacles 180 

The day of atonement - - 1 80 

The Sabbatical year 181 

The year of Jubilee - 182 

Subject of the book of Numbers 183 

The census - 183 

How long were they encamped at Sinai 183 

The twelve spies 184 

The two faithful ones 185 

Sentence of the rebellious Israelites 185 

Revolt of Korah -- 186 

Aaron's rod 188 

Removals and wanderings 189 

Miriam's death 190 

Miracle at Meribah 190 

Offence of Moses and Aaron 190 

Death of Aaron 191 

Compassing the land of Edom 191 

Weary of manna 192 

Fiery serpents 192 

The brazen serpent 193 

Its typical signification 194 

Balaam, the magician 195 

His journey, and the miracle connected with it 196 

His several prophecies -- 197 

Have they been fulfilled 199 

His wish and death 199 

iris character 200 

The " wars of the Lord " 200 

What alone can make exterminating wars justifia- 
ble 201 

Og, the king of Bashan <- --- 202 

His gigantic height - - - 202 



INDEX. 239 



Enumeration of giants mentioned in the Old Testa- 
ment 203 

What is contained in the book of Deuteronomy 205 

Prayer of Moses denied 205 

What is forbidden by the law against image-worship - 207 

Summary of the law - 207 

How the law is to be observed 208 

What were the Jewish signs and frontlets 208 

Special benevolent precepts 209 

Law respecting magical arts 209 

Against a particular idolatrous rite 210 

Against multiplying horses 210 

The law and the testimony 212 

Of what were the Israelites types - - - * 212 

The six nations of Canaan 213 

Various idols of the heathen 213 

Prophecies of Moses 216 

Who is the • ' Prophet like Moses " - 216 

Writings of Moses 217 

Writing materials in successive ages 219 

Successor of Moses 222 

Death and age of Moses 223 

Glossary - 225 

POETICAL PIECES. 

My Bible 6 

The six-days work -- 6 

The Sabbath 19 

Look within 23 

The Ark .-, 35 

Noah - 37 

The dove * 42 

Tower of Babel - - 50 

Rehearsal 57 

First battle-field - 59 



240 INDEX. 



Jacob's flight and dream - 78 

Sleeping under angels' wings 80 

Birth ofMoses --- -- 127 

The rod of Moses, or striking the rock - 147 

Gentleness of God 156 



V 




°o 







^ ... *V 










n>i 



Deacidified using the Bookkeeper process. 
Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide 
Treatment Date: May 2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A WORLD LEADER IN PAPER PRESERVATION 

111 Thomson Park r< 
Cranberry Township PA 16( 
(724) 779-21 1 1 






W 

^ 




5°* 




* ^ 













.«<?* 




